（本文转自：徐明的BLOG）
  How many philosophers does it take to change a light bulb? Depends on how you define 'change'.
　How many existentialists does it take to change a light bulb? Two--one to bemoan the darkness until the other redefines something else as light.
　How many Classic Idealists does it take to change a light bulb? Only one--he prays, God turns his head to pay attention, the light bulb moves!
　How many Analytic Philosophers does it take to change a light bulb? None-its a pseudo-problem...light bulbs give off light (hence the name ... if the bulb was broken and wasn't giving off light, it wouldn't be a 'light bulb' now would it? (oh, where has rigor gone?!)
　How many monists does it take to change a light bulb? Don't be silly, there is only ONE monist...
　How many liberation theologians does it take to change a light bulb? None--WE shot out the bulb in the name of Christian revolution!
　How many evolutionists does it take to change a light bulb? Only one (to aim the x-ray machine) but the bulb changes very, very slowly.
　How many Creation Scientists does it take to change a light bulb? Two: one to change it quickly, and one to point out that no transitional forms occurred at all.
　How many Process philosophers does it take to change a light bulb? Only one really fast one--to stand in front of the bulb and block it from prehending the attribute of 'brokenness' in the next 1/32nd of a second!
　How many skeptics does it take to change a light bulb? Actually, they won't do it--they have no sense of urgency about the situation--they aren't sure they're really in the dark...
　How many modal logicians does it take to change a light bulb? In WHICH world?
　How many fatalists does it take to change a light bulb? None, why fight it?
　How many Aristotelians does it take to change a light bulb? Exactly four (it's a causality thing)
　How many theodicists does it take to change a light bulb? 100-one to change the bulb, and 99 to explain why an infinite God of love would allow darkness to occur in the world at all
　How many solipcists does it take to change a light bulb? Actually there are none left in existence...they simply "solipcided away"
　How many fallibilists does it take to change a light bulb? Three, but I COULD be wrong about that.
　How many Epicureans does it take to change a light bulb? None-they're too busy taking advantage of the darkness!
　How many Hegelians does it take to change a light bulb? None-the bulb is just at one dialectical pole between 'bright' and 'dark'--it will eventually synthesize these into at least some dim glow for us...
　How many apocalypsists does it take to change a light bulb? Tons--some have to block the sun, some have to cover the moon with a dust cloud, some have to start a volcanic erruption, some have to generate the thunderstorm...but when it is changed, you will never be the same again!!
　How many Talmudic Sages does it take to change a light bulb? R. Abiva heard from R. Millerstein, who heard from Rab Josy, who got it from R. David, who got it from Moses, that it would take three. Whereupon, R. Marshmallow said that Moses said 'three' but meant 'two' since "light" has three radicals, but the vaw in the middle separates the light from the dark.
　How many biblical 'minimalists' does it take to change a light bulb? Grow up, guy--it never WAS a unitary light bulb, it was only a pack of fireflies flying randomly around the room until a fan cut on and they all started flying in synchronization...
　How many existentialists does it take to change a lightbulb? Two. One to change the lightbulb and one to observe how the lightbulb symbolizes an incandescent beacon of subjectivity in a netherworld of Cosmic Nothingness.
　How many Marxists does it take to change a lightbulb? None. The lightbulb contains the seeds of its own revolution.
　How many Episcopalians does it take to change a light bulb? Six. One to change the bulb, and five to form a society to preserve the memory of the old light bulb.
　How many chaos theorists does it take to change a light bulb? None, they just get the butterfly to flap its wings a SECOND time.
　How many quantum physicists does it take to change a light bulb? Only one, actually, but it takes two DISTINCT steps. First, she must look in the general direction of the bulb (to collapse the wave function-you can't very well change a bulb scattered all over the room, now can you?!) and then replace it before she blinks.
 

 
　　这是我在 IU-Bloomington 工作期间 (1998-1999) 收到的一封电子邮件的部分内容，可惜后来没把该邮件的全文保存下来。记得邮件是来自 N. Cocchiarella (IU 的一名教授，已退休)，但不记得上文的作者是否也是他。