


The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle



4 



High Towers and D e e p Wells 
(Or, Far from Nomonhan) 

* 




Back home, I found Kumiko in a good mood. A very good mood. It was almost six 
o'clock by the time I arrived home after seeing Malta Kano, which meant I had no time to 
fix a proper dinner. Instead, I prepared a simple meal from what I found in the freezer, 
and we each had a beer. She talked about work, as she always did when she was in a 
good mood: whom she had seen at the office, what she had done, which of her colleagues 
had talent and which did not. That kind of thing. 
I listened, making suitable responses. I heard no more than half of what she was 
saying. Not that I disliked listening to her talk about these things. Contents of the 
conversation aside, I loved watching her at the dinner table as she talked with enthusiasm 
about her work. This, I told myself, was "home." We were doing a proper job of carrying 
out the re sponsibilities that we had been assigned to perform at home. She was talking 
about her work, and I, after having prepared dinner, was listening to her talk. This was 
very different from the image of home that I had imagined vaguely for myself before 
marriage. But this was the home I had chosen. I had had a home, of course, when I was a 
child. But it was not one I had chosen for myself. I had been born into it, presented with it 
as an established fact. Now, however, I lived in a world that I had chosen through an act 
of will. It was my home. It might not be perfect, but the fundamental stance I adopted 
with regard to my home was to accept it, problems and all, because it was something I 
myself had chosen. If it had problems, these were almost certainly problems that had 
originated within me. 
"So what about the cat?" she asked. I summarized for her my meeting with Malta 
Kano in the hotel in Shinagawa. I told her about my polka-dot tie: that there had been no 
sign of it in the wardrobe. That Malta Kano had managed to find me in the crowded 
tearoom nonetheless. That she had had a unique way of dressing and of speaking, which I 
described. Kumiko enjoyed hearing about Malta Kano's red vinyl hat, but when I was 
unable to provide a clear answer regarding the whereabouts of our lost cat, she was 
deeply disappointed. 
"Then she doesn't know where the cat is, either?" Kumiko demanded. "The best she 
could do was tell you it isn't in our neighborhood any longer?" 
"That's about it," I said. I decided not to mention anything about the "obstructed 
flow" of the place we lived in or that this could have some connection to the 
disappearance of the cat. I knew it would bother Kumiko, and for my own part, I had no 
desire to increase the number of things we had to worry about. We would have had a real 
problem if Kumiko insisted on moving because this was a "bad place." Given our pres ent 
economic situation, it would have been impossible for us to move. 
"That's what she tells me," I said. "The cat is not around here anymore." 
"Which means it will never come home?" 
"I don't know," I said. "She was vague about everything. All she came up with was 
little hints. She did say she'd get in touch with me when she found out more, though." 
"Do you believe her?" 
"Who knows? I don't know anything about this kind of stuff." 
I poured myself some more beer and watched the head settle. Kumiko rested her 
elbow on the table, chin in hand. 

"She must have told you she won't accept payment or gifts of any kind," she said. 
"Uh-huh. That's certainly a plus," I said. "So what's the problem? She won't take our 
money, she won't steal our souls, she won't snatch the princess away. We've got nothing 
to lose." 
"I want you to understand one thing," said Kumiko. "That cat is very important to me. 
Or should I say to us. We found it the week after we got married. Together. You 
remember?" 
"Of course I do." 
"It was so tiny, and soaking wet in the pouring rain. I went to meet you at the station 
with an umbrella. Poor little baby. We saw him on the way home. Somebody had thrown 
him into a beer crate next to the liquor store. He's my very first cat. He's important to 
me, a kind of symbol. I can't lose him." 
"Don't worry. I know that." 
"So where is he? He's been missing for ten days now. That's why I called my brother. 
I thought he might know a medium or clairvoyant or something, somebody who could 
find a missing cat. I know you don't like to ask my brother for anything, but he's 
followed in my father's footsteps. He knows a lot about these things." 
"Ah, yes, the Wataya family tradition," I said as coolly as an evening breeze across an 
inlet. "But what's the connection between Noboru Wataya and this woman?" 
Kumiko shrugged. "I'm sure she's just somebody he happened to meet. He seems to 
have so many contacts these days." 
"I'll bet." 
"He says she possesses amazing powers but that she's pretty strange." Kumiko poked 
at her macaroni casserole. "What was her name again?" 
"Malta Kano," I said. "She practiced some kind of religious austerities on Malta." 
"That's it. Malta Kano. What did you think of her?" 
"Hard to say." I looked at my hands, resting on the table. "At least she wasn't boring. 
And that's a good thing. I mean, the world's full of things we can't explain, and 
somebody's got to fill that vacuum. Better to have somebody who isn't boring than 
somebody who is. Right? Like Mr. Honda, for example." 
Kumiko laughed out loud at the mention of Mr. Honda. "He was a wonderful old 
man, don't you think? I liked him a lot." 
"Me too," I said. 



For about a year after we were married, Kumiko and I used to visit the home of old 
Mr. Honda once a month. A practitioner of spirit possession, he was one of the Wataya 
family's favorite channeler types, but he was terrifically hard of hearing. Even with his 
hearing aid, he could barely make out what we said to him. We had to shout so loud our 
voices would rattle the shoji paper. I used to wonder if he could hear what the spirits said 
to him if he was so hard of hearing. But maybe it worked the other way: the worse your 
ears, the better you could hear the words of the spirits. He had lost his hearing in the war. 
A noncommissioned officer with Japan's Manchurian garrison, the Kwantung Army, he 
had suffered burst eardrums when an artillery shell or a hand grenade or something 
exploded nearby during a battle with a combined Soviet- Outer Mongolian unit at Nomon-

han on the border between Outer Mongolia and Manchuria. 
Our visits to Mr. Honda's place were not prompted by a belief on our part in his 
spiritual powers. I had never been interested in these things, and Kumiko placed far less 
trust in such supernatural matters than either her parents or her brother. She did have a 
touch of superstition, and she could be upset by an ominous prognostication, but she 
never went out of her way to involve herself in spiritual affairs. 
The only reason we went to see Mr. Honda was because her father ordered us to. It 
was the one condition he set for us to marry. True, it was a rather bizarre condition, but 
we went along with it to avoid complications. Neither of us had expected an easy time 
from her family. Her father was a government official. The younger son of a not very 
well- to-do farm family in Niigata, he had attended prestigious Tokyo University on 
scholarship, graduated with honors, and become an elite member of the Min istry of 
Transport. This was all very admirable, as far as I was concerned. But as is so often the 
case with men who have made it like this, he was arrogant and self- righteous. 
Accustomed to giving orders, he harbored not the slightest doubt concerning the values of 
the world to which he belonged. For him, hierarchy was everything. He bowed to 
superior authority without question, and he trampled those beneath him without 
hesitation. Neither Kumiko nor I believed that a man like that would accept a poor, 
twenty-four-year-old nobody like me, without position or pedigree or even decent grades 
or future promise, as a marriage partner for his daughter. We figured that after her parents 
turned us down, we'd get married on our own and live without having anything to do 
with them. 
Still, I did the right thing. I formally went to ask Kumiko's parents for her hand in 
marriage. To say that their reception of me was cool would be an understatement. The 
doors of all the world's refrigerators seemed to have been thrown open at once. 
That they gave us their permission in the end- with reluctance, but in a near-
miraculous turn of events- was thanks entirely to Mr. Honda. He asked them everything 
they had learned about me, and in the end he declared that if their daughter was going to 
get married, I was the best possible partner for her; that if she wanted to marry me, they 
could only invite terrible consequences by opposing the match. K umiko's parents had 
absolute faith in Mr. Honda at the time, and so there was nothing they could do but 
accept me as their daughter's husband. 
Finally, though, I was always the outsider, the uninvited guest. Kumiko and I would 
visit their home and have din ner with them twice a month with mechanical regularity. 
This was a truly loathsome experience, situated at the precise midpoint between a 
meaningless mortification of the flesh and brutal torture. Throughout the meal, I had the 
sense that their dining ro om table was as long as a railway station. They would be eating 
and talking about something way down at the other end, and I was too far away for them 
to see. This went on for a year, until Kumiko's father and I had a violent argument, after 
which we never saw each other again. The relief this gave me bordered on ecstasy. 
Nothing so consumes a person as meaningless exertion. 
For a time after our marriage, though, I did exert myself to keep relations between us 
on a good footing. And without a doubt, the least painful of my exertions were those 
monthly meetings with Mr. Honda. 
All payments to Mr. Honda were made by Kumiko's father. We merely had to visit 
Mr. Honda's home in Meguro once a month with a big bottle of sake, listen to what he 

had to tell us, and go home. Simple. 
We took to Mr. Honda immediately. He was a nice old man, whose face would light 
up whenever he saw the sake we had brought him. We liked everything about him-except 
perhaps for the way he left his tele vision on full blast because he was so hard of hearing. 
We always went to his house in the morning. Winter and summer, he sat with his legs 
down in the sunken hearth. In winter he would have a quilt wrapped around his waist to 
hold in the heat of the charcoal fire. In summer he used neither quilt nor fire. He was 
apparently a rather famous fortune- teller, but he lived very simply- even ascetically. His 
house was small, with a tiny entrance hall barely big enough for one person at a time to 
tie or untie a pair of shoes. The tatami mats on his floors were badly worn, and cracked 
windowpanes were patched with tape. Across the lane stood an auto repair shop, where 
there was always someone yelling at the top of his lungs. Mr. Honda wore a kimono 
styled midway between a sleeping robe and a traditional workman's jacket. It gave no 
evidence of having been washed in the recent past. He lived alone and had a woman 
come in to do the cooking and cleaning. For some reason, though, he never let her 
launder his robe. Scraggly white whiskers hung on his sunken cheeks. 
If there was anything in Mr. Honda's house that could be called impressive, it was the 
huge color television set. In such a tiny house, its gigantic presence was overwhelming. It 
was always tuned to the government- supported NHK network. Whether this was because 
he loved NHK, or he couldn't be bothered to change the channel, or this was a special set 
that re ceived only NHK, I had no way of telling, but NHK was all he ever watched. 
Instead of a flower arrangement or a calligraphic scroll, the living room's ceremonial 
alcove was filled with this huge television set, and Mr. Honda always sat facing it, 
stirring the divining sticks on the table atop his sunken hearth while NHK continued to 
blast out cooking shows, bonsai care instructions, news updates, and political discussions. 
"Legal work might be the wrong thing for you, sonny," said Mr. Honda one day, 
either to me or to someone standing twenty yards behind me. 
"It might?" 
"Yep, it might. The law presides over things of this world, finally. The world where 
shadow is shadow and light is light, yin is yin and yang is yang, I'm me and he's him. I 
am me and / He is him: / Autumn eve.' But you don't belong to tha t world, sonny. The 
world you belong to is above that or below that." 
"Which is better?" I asked, out of simple curiosity. "Above or below?" "It's not that 
either one is better," he said. After a brief coughing fit, he spat a glob of phlegm onto a 
tissue and studied it closely before crumpling the tissue and throwing it into a 
wastebasket. "It's not a question of bet ter or worse. The point is, not to resist the flow. 
You go up when you're supposed to go up and down when you're supposed to go down. 
When you're supposed to go up, find the highest tower and climb to the top. When you're 
supposed to go down, find the deepest well and go down to the bottom. When there's no 
flow, stay still. If you resist the flow, everything dries up. If everything dries up, the 
world is darkness. 'I am he and / He is me: / Spring nightfall.' Abandon the self, and 
there you are." 
"Is this one of those times when there's no flow?" Kumiko asked. 
"How's that?" 
"IS THIS ONE OF THOSE TIMES WHEN THERE'S NO FLOW?" Kumiko 
shouted. 

"No flow now," Mr. Honda said, nodding to himself. "Now's the time to stay still. 
Don't do anything. Just be careful of water. Sometime in the future, this young fellow 
could experience real suffering in connection with water. Water that's missing from 
where it's supposed to be. Water that's present where it's not supposed to be. In any case, 
be very, very careful of water." 
Kumiko, beside me, was nodding with the utmost gravity, but I could see she was 
struggling not to laugh. "What kind of water?" I asked. 
"I don't know," said Mr. Honda. "Water." 
On the TV, some university professor was saying that people's chaotic use of 
Japanese grammar corresponded precisely to the chaos in their lifestyles. "Properly 
speaking, of course, we cannot call it chaos. Grammar is like the air: someone higher up 
might try to set rules for using it, but people won't necessarily follow them." It sounded 
interesting, but Mr. Honda just went on talking about water. 
"Tell you the truth, I suffered over water," he said. "There was no water in 
Nomonhan. The front line was a mess, and supplies were cut off. No water. No rations. 
No bandages. No bullets. It was awful. The big boys in the rear were interested in only 
one thing: occupying territory as fast as possible. Nobody was thinking about supplies. 
For three days, I had almost no water. If you left a washrag out, it'd be wet with dew in 
the morning. You could wring out a few drops to drink, but that was it. There was just no 
other water at all. I wanted to die, it was so bad. Being thirsty like that is the worst thing 
in the world. I was ready to run out and take a bullet. Men who got shot in the stomach 
would scream for water. Some of them went crazy with the thirst. It was a living hell. We 
could see a big river flowing right in front of us, with all the water anybody could ever 
drink. But we couldn't get to it. Between us and the river was a line of huge Soviet tanks 
with flamethrowers. Machine gun emplacements bristled like pincushions. Sharpshooters 
lined the high ground. They sent up flares at night. All we had was Model 38 infantry 
rifles and twenty-five bullets each. Still, most of my buddies went to the river. They 
couldn't take it. Not one of them made it back. They were all killed. So you see, when 
you're supposed to stay still, stay still." 
He pulled out a tissue, blew his nose loudly, and examined the results before 
crumpling the tissue and throwing it into the wastebasket. 
"It can be hard to wait for the flow to start," he said, "but when you have to wait, you 
have to wait. In the meantime, assume you're dead." 
"You mean I should stay dead for now?" I asked. 
"How's that?" 
"YOU MEAN I SHOULD STAY DEAD FOR NOW?" 
"That's it, sonny. 'Dying is the only way / For you to float free: / Nomonhan.' " 
He went on talking about Nomonha n for another hour. We just sat there and listened. 
We had been ordered to "receive his teaching," but in a year of monthly visits to his 
place, he almost never had a "teaching" for us to "receive." He rarely performed 
divination. The one thing he talked about was the Nomonhan Incident: how a cannon 
shell blew off half the skull of the lieutenant next to him, how he leaped on a Soviet tank 
and burned it with a Molotov cocktail, how they cornered and shot a downed Soviet pilot. 
All his stories were interesting, even thrilling, but as with anything else, you hear them 
seven or eight times and they tend to lose some of their luster. Nor did he simply "tell" 
his stories. He screamed them. He could have been standing on a cliff edge on a windy 

day, shouting to us across a chasm. It was like watching an old Kurosawa movie from the 
very front row of a run-down theater. Neither of us could hear much of anything for a 
while after we left his house. 
Still, we-or at least I - enjoyed listening to Mr. Honda's stories. Most of them were 
bloody, but coming from the mouth of a dying old man in a dirty old robe, the details of 
battle lost the ring of reality. They sounded more like fairy tales. Almost half a century 
earlier, Mr. Honda's unit had fought a ferocious battle over a barren patch of wilderness 
on the Manchurian-Mongolian border. Until I heard about it from Mr. Honda, I knew 
almost nothing about the battle of Nomonhan. And yet it had been a magnificent battle. 
Almost bare-handed, they had defied the superior Soviet mechanized forces, and they had 
been crushed. One unit after another had been smashed, annihilated. Some officers had, 
on their own initiative, ordered their troops to retreat to avoid annihilation; their superiors 
forced them to commit suicide. Most of the troops captured by the Soviets refused to 
participate in the postwar exchange of prisoners, because they were afraid of being tried 
for desertion in the face of the enemy. These men ended up contributing their bones to 
the Mongolian earth. Sent home with an honorable discharge after he lost his hearing, 
Mr. Honda became a practitioner of divination. 
"It was probably all to the good," he said. "If my hearing hadn't been ruined, I 
probably would have died in the South Pacific. That's what happened to most of the 
troops who survived Nomonhan. Nomonhan was a great embarrassment for the Imperial 
Army, so they sent the survivors where they were most likely to be killed. The 
commanding officers who made such a mess of Nomonhan went on to have distinguished 
careers in central command. Some of the bastards even became politicians after the war. 
But the guys who fought their hearts out for them were almost all snuffed out." 
"Why was Nomonhan such an embarrassment for the army?" I asked. "The troops all 
fought bravely, and a lot of them died, right? Why did the survivors have to be treated so 
badly?" 
But Mr. Honda seemed not to hear my question. He stirred and rattled his divining 
sticks. "You'd better be careful of water," he said. 
And so ended the day's session. 



After my fight with Kumiko's father, we stopped going to Mr. Honda's. It was 
impossible for me to continue visiting him, knowing it was being paid for by my father-
in-law, and we were not in any position to pay him ourselves. We could barely hold our 
heads above water in those days. Eventually, we forgot about Mr. Honda, just as most 
busy young people tend to forget about most old people. 



In bed that night, I went on thinking about Mr. Honda. Both he and Malta Kano had 
spoken to me about water. Mr. Honda had warned me to be careful. Malta Kano had 
undergone austerities on the island of Malta in connection with her research on water. 
Perhaps it was a coincidence, but both of them had been deeply concerned about water. 
Now it was starting to worry me. I turned my thoughts to images of the battlefield at 

Nomonhan: the Soviet tanks and machine gun emplacements, and the river flowing 
beyond them. The unbearable thirst. In the darkness, I could hear the sound of the river. 
"Toru," Kumiko said to me in a tiny voice, "are you awake?" 
"Uh-huh." 
"About the necktie. I just remembered. I took it to the cleaner's in December. It 
needed pressing. I guess I just forgot." 
"December? Kumiko, that's over six months ago!" 
"I know. And you know I never do anything like that, forgetting things. It was such a 
lovely necktie, too." She put her hand on my shoulder. "I took it to the cleaner's by the 
station. Do you think they still have it?" 
"I'll go tomorrow. It's probably there." 
"What makes you think so? Six months is a long time. Most cleaners will get rid of 
things that aren't claimed in three months. They can do that. It's the law. What makes 
you think it's still there?" 
"Malta Kano said I'd find it. Somewhere outside the house." 
I could feel her looking at me in the da rk. 
"You mean you believe in what she says?" 
"I'm starting to." 
"Pretty soon you and my brother might Start seeing eye -to-eye " she said, a note of 
pleasure in her voice. ' 
"We just might," I said. 

I kept thinking about the Nomonhan battlefield after Kumiko fell asleep. The soldiers 
were all asleep there. The sky overhead was filled with stars, and millions of crickets 
were chirping. I could hear the river. I ifell asleep listening to it flow.
¡¡
