康德的想法很简单：必然的就是先验的；牛顿力学/物理学是必然的；所以其是先验的

https://praxeology.net/kantsong-page.htm

"The Transcendental Deduction of the Pure Concepts of Understanding"
"知性的纯粹概念的超验*演绎"

*Transcendental，一译“超验”，其时a priori作“先验”；一作“先验”，其时a priori作“先天”

by Immanuel Kant

Translation by Roderick T. Long

Music and vocals by Paul L. Fine

© 1984, 1999 Paul L. Fine and Roderick T. Long

Let us first divide cognition into rational analysis
让我们首先把认识分为理性分析
and sensory perception (which Descartes considered valueless).
和感官知觉（那笛卡尔认为没有价值的）。
Now reason gives us concepts which are true but tautological;
现在，理性给我们的概念是真实的，但却是同义反复。
sensation gives us images whose content is phenomenal.
感官给我们图像，其内容是现象性的。

Whatever greets our senses must exist in space and time
无论是什么传入我们感官的之中，都必须存在于空间和时间中
for else it would be nowhere and nowhen and therefore slime;
因为不然它就无处可寻、无时可在，因此不在也没有
the space and time we presuppose before we sense reality
在我们感觉到实在之前，我们所预设的空间和时间
must have innate subjective transcendental ideality.
必须具有内在的主观超验的观念性。

Thus space and time
因此，空间和时间
are forms of our perception
是我们感知的形式
whereby sensation’s synthesized in orderly array;
从而使感觉的综合有秩序地排列；
the same must hold
同样的情况也必须适用于
for rational conception:
理性的概念：
in everything we think, the laws of logic must hold sway.
逻辑法则一定支配着我们思考的一切。

But a problem here arises with respect to natural science:
但相对于自然科学，这里出现了一个问题。
while empirical in method, on pure thought it lays reliance.
虽然在方法是经验的，但它依赖于纯粹的思想。
Although for Newton's findings we to Newton give the glory
尽管我们把牛顿的发现归功于牛顿
Newton never could have found them if they weren’t known a priori.
如果它们不是被先验地知道，牛顿不可能发现它们。

We know that nature governed is by principles immutable
我们知道，自然界由不可改变的原则支配
but how we come to know this is inherently inscrutable;
但我们是如何知道这一点的，则是难以捉摸的。
that thought requires logic is a standpoint unassailable
思想需要逻辑，这是个不可动摇的立足点
but for objects of our senses explanations aren't available.
但对于我们感官的对象，却没有解释摆在眼前。

So let’s attempt
to vivisect cognition
by critical analysis in hope that we may find
the link between
pure thought and intuition:
a deduction transcendental will shed light upon the mind.
因此，让我们尝试通过批判性分析对认知进行剖解，希望我们能找到纯粹的思想和直觉之间的联系：一个超验演绎将让心灵锃明。

You may recall that space and time are forms of apprehension
你可能记得，空间和时间是 领会 的形式
and therefore what we sense has spatiotemporal extension;
因此，我们感觉到的东西有时空的外延。
whatever is extended is composed of a plurality
任何被延展的东西都是复多
but through an act of synthesis we form a commonality.
但通过一个综合，一个行动，一个共性由我们形成了。

If we are to be conscious of a single concrete entity
如果我们要意识到一个单一的具体实体
each part of its extension must be given independently
其外延的每一部分都必须被独立地给予
combining in a transcendental apperceptive unity
结合在一个超验的统觉性的统一中
to which I may ascribe the term “self-conscious” with impunity.
没有比这一个统一更配得上“自我意识”这个词的了。

The order of
our various sensations
我们的各种感知的秩序
arises from connections not beheld in sense alone;
来自于不仅仅是感觉上的联系。
our self creates
我们的自我创造了
the rules of their relations
它们之间关系的规则
and of this combination it is conscious as its own.
并且通过这种组合它意识到它自己
While these rules correspond to scientific causal laws
虽然这些规则与科学的因果律相对应
the question of their constancy remains to give us pause;
但它们的恒定性这个问题仍然让我们感到不安。
but once we recollect the source of our self-conscious mind,
但是，一旦我们回忆起我们自我意识的来源，我们就会发现，
to this perverse dilemma a solution we may find.
我们就可以找到解决这一困境的办法。

The self is nothing but its act of synthesis sublime;
自我不是别的，正是它自己崇高的综合行动，
this act must be the same to be self-conscious over time.
而这种行动必得持存才能随着时间变成自我意识
The rules for combination of its selfhood form the ground
它自我组合的规则成就了基础
so what we perceive tomorrow by today’s laws must be bound.
所以我们明天感知到的东西也一样要受到今天的规律的约束。
These constant laws
这些恒常的法则
whereby we shape experience
我们的经验由所形成
are simply those which regulate our reason: that is plain.
就是那些规范我们的理性的法则：显然如此。
So don’t ask why
所以不要问为什么
the stars display invariance —
星星会有恒常不变
the Cosmos is produced by your disoriented brain!
——宇宙是由你迷失方向的大脑产生!

STOP.

REPEAT IN GERMAN.