
flow chart/diagram
e.g. The charts illustrate how cement is roduced and how it is used for the production of concrete.
总结：go through/pass through three stages, consist of three stages
at the first stage, at the larval stage; at the next/second stage, enter/reach the next stage, mark/represent the ... stage, step, phase; at the final stage/step, at the adult/mature stage; (某考官：in the first stage ('in' a period and 'at' a time) )
it takes ... to; this stage lasts for ...; After a period of ...; for a period of ...
Tea leaves are washed before being dried; Tea leaves are washed and then put in a container, where they are dried.
... subsequently ...

工序
收集gather, harvest, collect; 传送transport, deliver, send,transfer; 转化convert into, transform into; 混合mix, blend; 使用utilise, employ, use, apply；扔掉throw away, remove, dispose of
dispose of refuse
生产制造创造produce, generate, create, make
加热弄干降温heat,dry,cool,freeze
压缩condense, compress
加工process
装罐can,pack,package
mixture混合物
conveyor belt输送带
ground-grinder
(heavy) roller
pulverise粉碎, the first step involves the pulverising of ... in ... to create a powder 
cylinder
rotating heater - a heater that is constantly turning
is packaged in(to) bags
... represents 15% of the raw material of concrete production, while ... make up 10%
assembled raw materials
rotates in a clockwise direction
with three other ingredients to manufacture concrete
generate (electricity)/produce/manufacture/create 
tank, container, ... has a store of (water)
flows horizontally through
reach（向上也行）
is pumped back up to ground/back to ground level; is pumped underground from the surface to a depth of 4.5km
grid
use - harness
a power plant operates by using ...
passing through this area, ...

生物
产卵lay eggs, produce eggs, deposit eggs
lie -lay-lain-lying 躺
lie -lied-lied-lying 说谎
lay-laid-laid-laying 安放，下（蛋）
孵化hatch eggs, incubate eggs
破卵而出break the shell; come out of eggs, emerge from the[!] eggs, hatch from eggs, egg breaks, egg cracks
变大grow older，is reared
成年reach maturity ，grow to maturity，attain maturity，come to maturity, attain/reach adulthood, mature to adulthood, fully matured

measure 3 to 8 centimetres, the size of ... is ...

slow-moving upper reaches of the river; swim downstream to the lower river
the adult fish
to deposit/lay their eggs
emerge from the eggs
aquatic水生的 the aquatic location



