Die Welt ist alles, was der Fall ist. (The world is all that is the case.) —— L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 1.

[D]enk nicht, sondern schau! ([D]on't think, but look!) —— Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein, Philosophische Untersuchungen, I. 66, translated by Gertrude Elizabeth Margaret Anscombe

"In treatiing the world as a limited whold he stationed himself outside it"(A.W.Moore)

‘What we cannot speak about,’ he wrote in conclusion, ‘we must pass over in silence.
转引自infinity第188页

Imagine someone saying, "But I know how tall I am!" and laying his hand on top of his head to indicate it! (PI §279)
"'I know how the colour green looks to me' - surely that makes sense! - Certainly; what use of the sentence are you thinking of." 

哲学工作的全部在于为苍蝇指出飞出捕蝇瓶的方法 (PI §309)，即治疗；同时哲学也在于抑制构建哲学理论的冲动，它必须 "leave everything as it is" (PI §124)

The famous part of paragraph 201 of the “Philosophical Investiga-tions” reads as follows:
This was our paradox: no course of action could be determined by a rule, because every course of action can be made out to accord with the rule. The answer was: if everything can be made out to accord with the rule, then it can also be made out to conf l ict with it. And so there would be neither accord nor conf l ict here.4

We say to him: “Look what you’ve done!” – Pie doesn’t under-stand. We say: “You were meant to add 2 look how you began the series!” – He answers: “Yes, isn’t it right? I thought that was how I was meant to do it.” – Or suppose he pointed to the series and said: “But I went on in the same way.” – It would now be no use to say: “But can’t you see....?” – and repeat the old examples and ex-planations. – In such a case we might say, perhaps: It comes natu-ral to this person to understand our order with our explanations as we should understand the order: “Add 2 up to 1000, 4 up to 2000, 6 up to 3000 and so on.”5

4 L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, trans. G.E.M. Anscombe, Blackwell, Oxford 1986, §201.
5 Ibidem, §185. 