That you believe a philosopher exprofesso to be free of confusion in concepts and definitions is something I find almost astonishing. Nowhere else are they more common than in philosophers who are not mathematicians, and Wolff was no mathematician, though he put together many compendiums. Just look around at the modern philosophers, at Schelling, Hegel, Nees von Esenbeck and consorts—don't their definitions make your hair stand on end? Read in the history of ancient philosophy what the men of the day, Plato and others (I except Aristotle), gave as explanations. And even in Kant matters are often not much better; his distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions seems to me to be either a triviality or false (Gauss 1863-1929, Vol. xii, pp. 62-3). (From Kant to Hilbert, p. 293.)

“在独断论歧途上陷于紊乱的哲学家，特别是谢林派和黑格尔派的哲学家”是与自然科学相对抗的。黑格尔的自然哲学“形成一连串粗鲁的经验错误，毫无价值的批判或不加任何评论的引文堆积。” 
Schelling`s und Hegel`s Verhältniss zur Naturwissenschaft. (Als Antwort auf die Angriffe des Herrn Nees von Esenbeck in der Neuen Jenaer Lit.-Zeitung, Mai 1843, insbesondere für die Leser dieser Zeitschrift.).
Schleiden, M(atthias) J(acob)

To go straight to the deepest depth, I went for Hegel; what unclear thoughtless flow of words I was to find there! My unlucky star led me from Hegel to Schopenhauer ... Even in Kant there were many things that I could grasp so little that given his general acuity of mind I almost suspected that he was pulling the reader's leg or was even an imposter.
Boltzmann, Theoretical Physics, p.155
Quoted in D Flamm. Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 14 (1983) 257.
D Flamm, Ludwig Boltzmann and his influence on science, Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. 14 (1983), 255-278.

That in the moral sciences traces of the activity of the human intellect and of the several stages of its development should present themselves, was a matter of course; but surely, if nature really reflected the result of the thought of a creative mind, the system ought, without difficulty, to find a place for her comparatively simple phenomena and processes. It was at this point that Hegel’s philosophy, we venture to say, utterly broke down. His system of nature seemed, at least to natural philosophers, absolutely crazy…. The philosophers accused the scientific men of narrowness; the scientific men retorted that the philosophers were crazy. And so it came about that men of science began to lay some stress on the banishment of all philosophical influences from their work… Thus, it must be confessed, not only were the illegitimate pretensions of the Hegelian system to subordinate to itself all other studies rejected, but no regard was paid to the rightful claims of philosophy, that is, the criticism of the sources of cognition, and the definition of the functions of the intellect. (Helmholtz 1995 [1862], 79–80)
1862, “On the Relation of Natural Science to Science in General,” in Science and Culture: Popular and Philosophical Essays, ed. David Cahan, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1995, 76–95.
SEP.Hermann von Helmholtz

Hegel has been called the successor of Kant; that is a serious misunderstanding of Kant and an unjustified elevation of Hegel. Kant’s system, though proved untenable by later developments, was the attempt of a great mind to establish rationalism on a scientific basis. Hegel’s system is the poor construction of a fanatic who has seen one empirical truth and attempts to make it a logical law within the most unscientific of all logics. Whereas Kant’s system marks the peak of the historical line of rationalism, Hegel’s system belongs in the period of decay of speculative philosophy which characterizes the nineteenth century. (Reichenbach 1951, p. 72)
Hans Reichenbach, ‘The Rise of Scientific Philosophy’, 1951.