12.18
道尔顿《化学哲学的一种新体系》（A New System of Chemical Philosophy）（1808）

12.13
Philosophie zoologique ou exposition des considérations relatives à l'histoire naturelle des animaux，以前，哲学曾是一切，“那些研究狒狒的人会比洛克对形而上学做得更多”

10.17
在牛顿的时代，“哲学的首要问题看来是从运动的现象中发现自然的伟力，然后从这些力量中演证出其它现象”

我自己以来思索的，达到了海德堡要理问答里讲述的道理

xx
我有三个敌人：鼻腔、肠胃，现在又多了一个，心脏

大脑......渗透液压......


9.12

用投影函数调换成原始递归的模样
判断偶数用反符号函数

算术、真与悖论
第三章一到三节
原始递归函数部分
27-35


9.6
銀シャリ - 鰻和弘「自然豊かな山梨県の湖を背に鰻の悩みを聞く」「発明」 

漫才的起源就是闲聊啊！


9.4
在歪歪扭扭的茶碗中，在低下的茶室中，在枯寂的园中岩石中，我感受到侘寂的体现

8.31
读harry Frankfurt的效率是strawson的4倍

8.21
gillian russell同一个内容能发三四篇

7.12
昨晚心发慌，四肢不受控
顿生一种荒凉之感

3.29
她现在大有变成一个保留有以前的俏皮可爱的贵妇人形象

3.3
花40分钟给熊明讲解构造想法


这是一场“强者”对“弱者”的战争，可是这也是一场大卫对战哥利亚的战争
伟大的人民

2.13
听黄禹迪/teki讲syntactic proof of natural deduction

xx.xx
君子坦荡荡，小人长戚戚
我就是那个长戚戚的小人也

xx.xx
虽然近在眼前，但感觉事物都好远

i am living in a constant daze
时常感觉大脑被啃掉了一块，
事物都离得很远

12.13
报告

12.10
与温嘉晋吃饭
作报告

11.24
好可爱的公鸭嗓嚎叫

11.19
与熊明谈，一点小想法，确证康书疑

11.13
参佛山南海博物馆

~11.10
sep

11.8
看了一部分iep，这次没讲出什么我不知道的东西

10.22
看了庵野秀明大学时的动画短片和奥特曼

xx.xx.xx

肠胃和鼻腔

心脏

四个：
假想敌（如今我把你想象成小恶魔似的了）
害怕心里的想法通过桌子或大地传导到别人
害怕别人在背后议论、笑的是我
（小时候）怕黑、怕看到鬼影

xx.xx.xx

在感受到转移了场所就不再有关联的感觉之后。在经历过“猪头帮”那样段的时间的相处之后，又一次体会到了那样的感受。进入到高三之后，终于变得自在（但还是一样迅疾地找了一个人攀附作伴）和温和的流转，回想起每次晚修过后静谧地闲聊时光

xx.xx

我是她们的“艺人”，她和她也是

她来找我分配一个名号，她说自己就叫“猪尾巴”了

吴在底下“打call”，她说她是我的“粉丝”

每次和人合照她们都没有给我相片。现在她们许是删掉了吧。

想起一次吃饭，没有组织的人坐在一起，有人说：好像上一次我们也是这样坐的。实际上上一次我是和她们坐在一起的。因为一个看电影的晚修一次打狼人杀而作好了约定。起初还不知所措，但一旦到了游戏之后就放松下来。最终结束之后却又陷入了迷茫。好像每次都是这样。

在她们在远上喊了声加油的时候，隔壁班的谁对嘉晋调笑说“哇，果然女生在看着你啊”，其实她们给喊加油的是我。她们就是喜欢我那从车库墙跳下去滑下的那一招。我的意识，故意作着狂乱的动作。却小跑下去捡球，不愿再展露那一招。

想起以前排练所谓的“长征”，她扮演兵士蹲在地上架起长伞作枪，我似乎看见闪现她稍张开的双腿似乎微微露出了一点边，当时我站在对面边，她似发现了这一，似拢了双腿

另一项是抱住我，她可确曾有过抱住过我吗？她说“想不想我？想不想合照？”吴在旁边。当时我还在想些不切的荒唐。看到她晒她当时后我便立刻知晓了。

无论是对谁，她都玲珑。
即使这样，也免不了被勾心斗角……

回想起那时她找我玩的时候，我因不知所措和故作姿态所显出来的愚蠢样子，长身是外套而下半身是短裤，又故意作出不屑似的拒绝

说到为什么一起玩，她说是因为觉得我很聪明。有时候其她女生也加入了进来

有一次，她帮我化妆

xx.xx

我害怕ta人看出我的空虚、我的浅薄。
看穿了--就让人家看穿我有多么浅薄、多么空虚吧

xx.xx
对时间的焦虑感

脑袋像浆糊一样

xx.xx.xx
通过江绪林了解了一番经典著作

21. 10. 19
看到一对安静地坐在一起的情侣。一个人偶尔在干着自己的事情。就像和环境融为了一体一样，两个人静谧地相对，那是多么好的关系啊。


尴尬时无处安放的双手，
一个人孤独地行走。
老人啊，你告诉我，为什么你的脸上充满褶皱？
为什么你的眼里常含忧愁？

21.9.～
确实有一种小孩子拼积木，发现了新世界的快感，可是语法上的东西实在让人恼怒

xx.xx

我曾经为天使所眷顾

xx.xx

曾经/如今我是多么的漂亮，可是没有人爱我

如今我是多么地丑陋，可是仍然没有人爱我

于是我只好孤独地死去。我不想丑陋地死去/留下丑陋，可是死总是丑陋的

21.9.11

have read 《西方哲学原著选读（下）》, learnt about Montesquieu, Voltaire, Kant and Fichte

8.28, 29

了解一番Russell and Godel on analyticity and husserl, frege and hilbert's correspondences

29
海洋世界游

8.18

摘抄：
By the time we reach the seventeenth century and the Newtonian revolution in physics, the problem reappears in the context of a change of criteria of explanation and intelligibility. This has been beautifully described in an article by Y. Gingras (2001). Gingras argues that “the use of mathematics in dynamics (as distinct from its use in kinematics) had the effect of transforming the very meaning of the term ‘explanation’ as it was used by philosophers in the seventeenth century” (385). What Gingras describes, among other things, is how the mathematical treatment of force espoused by Newton and his followers—a treatment that ignored the mechanisms that could explain why and how this force operated—became an accepted standard for explanation during the eighteenth century. After referring to the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries’ discussions on the mechanical explanation of gravity, he remarks:

This episode shows that the evaluation criteria for what was to count as an acceptable ‘explanation’ (of gravitation in this case) were shifting towards mathematics and away from mechanical explanations. Confronted with a mathematical formulation of a phenomenon for which there was no mechanical explanation, more and more actors chose the former even at the price of not finding the latter. This was something new. For the whole of the seventeenth century and most of the eighteenth, to ‘explain’ a physical phenomenon meant to give a physical mechanism involved in its production….The publication of Newton’s Principia marks the beginning of this shift where mathematical explanations came to be preferred to mechanical explanations when the latter did not conform to calculations. (Gingras 2001, 398)

see however Dorato 2017 for a wide-ranging claim concerning “explanatory switches” at crucial junctions in the history of physics


Explanation in Mathematics
First published Sun Apr 6, 2008; substantive revision Fri Mar 16, 2018
The philosophical analysis of mathematical explanations concerns itself with two different, although connected, areas of investigation. The first area addresses the problem of whether mathematics can play an explanatory role in the natural and social sciences. The second deals with the problem of whether mathematical explanations occur within mathematics itself. Accordingly, this entry surveys the contributions to both areas, it shows their relevance to the history of philosophy, mathematics, and science, it articulates their connection, and points to the philosophical pay-offs to be expected by deepening our understanding of the topic.

1. Mathematical explanations in the natural sciences
2. The explanatory role of mathematics in science: some historical remarks
3. Philosophical relevance of mathematical explanations in science
3.1 Mathematics, modeling and idealization
3.2 Indispensability arguments
4. Mathematical explanations within mathematics
5. Mathematical explanations: some historical remarks
6. Two models for mathematical explanation: Steiner and Kitcher
6.1 A local model of explanation: Steiner
6.2 A holistic model of explanation: Kitcher
7. Recent developments
8. Connections to other debates
9. Conclusion
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Mathematical explanations in the natural sciences
Mathematics plays a central role in our scientific picture of the world. How the connection between mathematics and the world is to be accounted for remains one of the most challenging problems in philosophy of science, philosophy of mathematics, and general philosophy. A very important aspect of this problem is that of accounting for the explanatory role mathematics seems to play in the account of physical phenomena.

Consider the following example from evolutionary biology introduced in Baker 2005 and discussed extensively in the philosophical literature. It has to do with the life-cycle of the so-called ‘periodical’ cicada. It turns out that three species of such cicadas:

…share the same unusual life-cycle. In each species the nymphal stage remains in the soil for a lengthy period, then the adult cicada emerges after 13 years or 17 years depending on the geographical area. Even more strikingly, this emergence is synchronized among the members of a cicada species in any given area. The adults all emerge within the same few days, they mate, die a few weeks later and then the cycle repeats itself.” (2005, 229)
Several questions have been raised about this specific type of life cycle but one of them is why such periods are prime. One explanation appeals to the biological claim that cicadas that minimize intersection with other cicadas’ and predators’ life cycles have an evolutionary advantage over those that do not. The mathematical component of the explanation complements the biological claim by pointing out that prime periods minimize intersection.

When we move to physics, it becomes even more difficult—given the highly mathematized nature of the subject—to distinguish between the mathematical and the physical components of an explanation. Consider the following example. Mark the faces of a tennis racket with R (for rough) and S (for smooth). Hold the tennis racket horizontally by its handle with face S facing up. Let y be the intermediate principal axis. This is the vertical axis perpendicular to the handle and passing through the center of mass of the racquet. Toss the racket attempting to make it rotate about the y axis. Catch the racket by its handle after one full rotation. The surprising observation is that the R face will almost always be up (one would expect S to be up). In other words, the racket makes a half twist about its handle. An explanation of this phenomenon was given in Ashbaugh, Chicone, & Cushman 1991. They say: “In this paper we explain the twist by analyzing the [differential] equations of motion of the tennis racket in space…Our treatment of the twist is divided into two parts. In the first part we prove two theorems which show that the handle moves nearly in a plane and rotates nearly uniformly…In the second part, we discuss how the twist and rotation of the handle are related” (Ashbaugh & others 1991, 68). There is no question that we are explaining a physical regularity but mathematics enters here both in the modeling of the phenomenon and in the explanatory account by means of the classical dynamics of a rotating tennis racket.

Another simple example, in which a geometrical fact seems to do much of the explaining, has been offered by Peter Lipton:

There also appear to be physical explanations that are non-causal. Suppose that a bunch of sticks are thrown into the air with a lot of spin so that they twirl and tumble as they fall. We freeze the scene as the sticks are in free fall and find that appreciably more of them are near the horizontal than near the vertical orientation. Why is this? The reason is that there are more ways for a stick to be the horizontal than near th

8.5

回忆起班级的长征纪念活动，一群学生到学校车道旁聚集的时候，旁边有几个保安来劝阻，说明后才离去；

另想起我二姑就是“房东”和“钉子户”，我们去她家做客时她打电话说：“我家来客人了哦，你敢断水停电你要死咯”

8.3

干了六有余日焊电路、组装、杂活、测试等活，意外、问题何其多

摘抄：
A common objection to conceptual engineering argues that instead of revising and improving existing concepts, conceptual engineering creates new concepts incongruent with the old ones, and is thus philosophically irrelevant or merely changing the subject. One response to this objection is to take a functionalist view of conceptual engineering, such that so long as the new concepts serve the same function as the old concepts, conceptual engineering preserves the relevant subject matter and no problematic discontinuity obtains. Another response, invoked by Herman Cappelen, argues that the relevant continuity to be preserved in conceptual engineering is that of topics; as long as there is continuity in the topics our concepts address, Cappelen argues, there is continuity in our philosophical inquiry even as the intension and extension of concepts change.

8.6

醒来时已是15点。一小时后在再从起，感时腿软无力

摘抄：
在《存在的勇气》一书中, 田立克分析了“勇气”（Courage）的意义，再论“忧虑”（Anxiety），及如何面对“忧虑”和“焦虑”。他认为“忧虑”远比“恐惧”（Fear）严重，因为恐惧有它的对象（Object）, 例如，害怕失业，害怕失婚、害怕失恋、害怕疾病、害怕死亡、害怕见鬼等等。

相反，忧虑（Anxiety, Angst）却没有对象（Object）。（存在的勇气，p33）

8.2

摘抄：
Folk psychology is a name traditionally used to denote our everyday way of understanding, or rationalizing, intentional actions in mentalistic terms. 
sep：folk psychology

husserl's lifeworld was influenced by heiderggder's being-in-the world

Dworkin's writings were designed to assert the ubiquity and denounce the injustice of institutionalized and normalized sex-based harm against women. 

8.1

读梅洛庞蒂sep、iep，摘抄：
The characteristic approach of Merleau-Ponty’s theoretical work is his effort to identify an alternative to intellectualism or idealism, on the one hand, and empiricism or realism, on the other, by critiquing their common presupposition of a ready-made world and failure to account for the historical and embodied character of experience.
sep：梅洛庞蒂

Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s work is commonly associated with the philosophical movement called existentialism and its intention to begin with an analysis of the concrete experiences, perceptions, and difficulties, of human existence. However, he never propounded quite the same extreme accounts of radical freedom, being-towards-death, anguished responsibility, and conflicting relations with others, for which existentialism became both famous and notorious in the 1940s and 1950s. 
iep

What is clear however, is that The Visible and the Invisible does attempt to effect a transition from something like a phenomenology of consciousness (which is basically just an analysis of how the objects we perceive present themselves to us), to a philosophy of Being. Being is another of those words in philosophy that is frequently thrown around, but perhaps relatively rarely understood. This is partly because it is not something that we can pin down or define, because it exceeds all of our resources for attempting to describe it. Let us suggest, hesitatingly, that Being is that which allows existence to be possible at all, and Merleau-Ponty becomes increasingly concerned with such matters.
[…]
The pre-reflective cogito is basically just the idea that there is a cogito before language, or to put it crudely, that there is a self anterior to both language and thought that we can aim to get in closer contact with. The notion of a pre-reflective cogito hence presumes the possibility of a consciousness without language, and it exhibits something of a nostalgic desire to return to some brute, primordial experience. This is something that thinkers like Irigiray have criticized Merleau-Ponty for, and in The Visible and the Invisible he has come to share these type of concerns.
iep

"he does not dispute that there is a divergence, or dehiscence, in our embodied situation that is evident in the difference that exists between touching and being touched, between looking and being looked at, or between the sentient and the sensible in his own vocabulary"(iep, b. The Chiasm/Reversibility)

“I can identify the hand touched in the same one which will in a moment be touching… In this bundle of bones and muscles which my right hand presents to my left, I can anticipate for an instant the incarnation of that other right hand, alive and mobile, which I thrust towards things in order to explore them. The body tries… to touch itself while being touched and initiates a kind of reversible reflection” (PP 93).

This suggests that the hand that we touch, while it is touching an inanimate object, is hence not merely another such ‘object’, but another fleshy substance that is capable of reversing the present situation and being mobile and even aggressive. Given that we cannot touch ourselves, or even somebody else, without this recognition of our own tangibility and capacity to be touched by others, it seems that the awareness of what it feels like to be touched encroaches, or even supervenes upon the experience of touching (VI 147). Any absolute distinction between being in the world as touching, and being in the world as touched, deprives the existential phenomena of their true complexity. Our embodied subjectivity is never located purely in either our tangibility or in our touching, but in the intertwining of these two aspects, or where the two lines of a chiasm intersect with one another. The chiasm then, is simply an image to describe how this overlapping and encroachment can take place between a pair that nevertheless retains a divergence, in that touching and touched are obviously never exactly the same thing.
According to Merleau-Ponty, these observations also retain an applicability that extends well beyond the relationship that obtains between touching and being touched. He contends that mind and body (VI 247, 259), the perceptual faith and its articulation (VI 93), subject and object, self and world (VI 123), as well as many other related dualisms, are all associated chiasmically, and he terms this interdependence of these various different notions the flesh (VI 248-51). The rather radical consequences of this intertwining become most obvious when Merleau-Ponty sets about describing the interactions of this embodied flesh. At one stage in The Visible and the Invisible he suggests that the realization that the world is not simply an object:

“does not mean that there was a fusion or coinciding of me with it: on the contrary, this occurs because a sort of dehiscence opens my body in two, and because between my body looked at and my body looking, my body touched and my body touching, there is overlapping or encroachment, so that we may say that the things pass into us, as well as we into the things” (VI 123).

According to Merleau-Ponty then, this non-dualistic divergence between touching and being touched, which necessitates some form of encroachment between the two terms, also means that the world is capable of encroaching upon and altering us, just as we are capable of altering it. Such an ontology rejects any absolute antinomy between self and world, as well as any notion of subjectivity that prioritizes a rational, autonomous individual, who is capable of imposing their choice upon a situation that is entirely external to them.
ibid.

“Husserl's formulation of the lifeworld was also influenced by Wilhelm Dilthey's "life-nexus" (German Lebenszusammenhang) and Martin Heidegger's Being-in-the-world (German In-der-Welt-Sein). The concept was further developed by students of Husserl such as Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Jan Patočka, and Alfred Schütz.”

从前的旧思想：一直的老问题：为什么我是“自己”而不是ta人？