
Demey Lorenz, Barteld Kooi / Sack, Joshua 
Logic and Probability 


The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.) 

Abstract: 1. Combining Logic and Probability Theory 
2. Propositional Probability Logics 
2.1 Probabilistic Semantics 
2.2 Adams’ Probability Logic 
limit 
2.3 Further Generalizations 
3. Basic Probability Operators 
3.1 Qualitative Representations of Uncertainty 
3.2 Sums and Products of Probability Terms 
Expressive power with and without linear combinations, Probabilities belonging to a given subset, Polynomial weight formulas... 
4. Modal Probability Logics 
Modal probability logic makes use of many probability spaces, each associated with a possible world or state 
4.1 Basic Finite Modal Probability Models 
4.2 Indexing and Interpretations 
Stochastic Interpretation 
agents and actions 
principles on higher-order probabilities, for instance in the Judy Benjamin Problem (van Fraassen 1981a) 
Subjective Interpretation 
strategies 
4.3 Probability Spaces 
4.4 Combining Quantitative and Qualitative Uncertainty 
Box 
4.5 Dynamics 
probabilistic update, see dynamic epistemic logic 
5. First-order Probability Logic 
5.1 An Example of a First-order Probability Logic 
5.1.1 Quantifying over More than One Variable 
5.1.2 Conditional Probability 
5.1.3 Probabilities as Terms 
5.2 Possible World First-order Probability Logic 
5.3 Metalogic 
Generally it is hard to provide proof systems for first-order probability logics, because the validity problem for these logics is generally undecidable. It is even not the case, as it is the case in classical first-order logic, that if an inference is valid, then one can find out in finite time (see Abadi and Halpern (1994)). 

Nonetheless there are many results for first-order probability logic. For instance, Hoover (1978) and Keisler (1985) study completeness results. Bacchus (1990) and Halpern (1990) also provide complete axiomatizations as well as combinations of first-order probability logics and possible-world first-order probability logics respectively. In Ognjanović and Rašković (2000), an infinitary complete axiomatization is given for a more general version of the possible-world first-order probability logic presented here. 
Bibliography 
Academic Tools 
Other Internet Resources 
Related Entries