
Dennett, Daniel C. (1988) Quining Qualia. In: Marcel, A. & Bisiach, E. (eds.) Consciousness in Modern Science, Oxford University Press.


“I see you tucking eagerly into a helping of steaming
cauliflower, the merest whiff of which makes me faintly
nauseated, and I find myself wondering how you could possibly
relish that taste, and then it occurs to me that to you,
cauliflower probably tastes (must taste?) different.”

“my first sip of breakfast orange juice tastes much sweeter than
my second sip if I interpose a bit of pancakes and maple syrup,
but after a swallow or two of coffee, the orange juice goes back
to tasting (roughly? exactly?) the way it did the first sip.
Surely we want to say (or think about) such things, and surely
we are not wildly wrong when we do, so . . . surely it is quite
OK to talk of the way the juice tastes to Dennett at time t, and
ask whether it is just the same as or different from the way the
juice tastes to Dennett at time t’...”


Imagine a wine-tasting machine. It has perfect functional
duplicates of our taste buds and olfactory organs. These sensory
devices collects information from a wine sample, transmit to a
central processor, which compares the information with its
database. Finally, the machine outputs a wine-tasting report.

“Such a machine might well perform better than human wine
tasters on all reasonable tests of accuracy and consistency the
winemakers could devise, but surely no matter how ‘sensitive’
and ‘discriminating’ such a system becomes, it will never have,
and enjoy, what we do when we taste a wine: the qualia of
conscious experience!”


the traditional conception is committed to
four properties of qualia.

ineffable
They can’t be verbally described

intrinsic
They are not relational, dispositional, or functional
properties
They are simple

private
Undetectable from a third-person perspective (i.e. not
through physiological or behavior tests)

directly accessible
The experiencer has privileged first-person access to qualia


Inverted Spectrum

Imagine that your color experience is inverted from mine: when
I see orange, you see blue; when I see blue, you see orange, etc..
If we were born this way, there is no way we can know that our
color experiences are different.

“how do I know that you and I see the same subjective color
when we look at something? Since we both learned color words
by being shown public colored objects, our verbal behavior will
match even if we experience entirely different subjective colors.”


the Brainstorm machine

“[T]here were some neuroscientific apparatus that fits on your
head and feeds your visual experience into my brain... With
eyes closed I accurately report everything you are looking at,
except that I marvel at how the sky is yellow, the grass red, and
so forth. Would this not confirm, empirically, that our qualia
were different?”

“But suppose the technician then pulls the plug on the
connecting cable, inverts it 180 degrees and reinserts it in the
socket. Now I report the sky is blue, the grass green, and so
forth.”


the neurosurgical prank

When you were sleeping, a neurosurgeon made some changes to
your brain. “You wake up one morning to find that the grass
has turned red, the sky yellow, and so forth. No one else notices
any color anomalies in the world, so the problem must be in
you.”

“There are (at least) two different ways the evil neurosurgeon
might perform the surgery:

(I) Invert one of the ‘early’ qualia-producing channels, e.g., in
the optic nerve, so that all relevant neural events ‘downstream’
are the ‘opposite’ of their original and normal values. Ex
hypothesi this inverts your qualia.”

“(II) Leave all those early pathways intact and simply invert
certain memory-access links – whatever it is that accomplishes
your tacit (and even unconscious!) comparison of today’s hues
with those of yore. Ex hypothesi this does not invert your qualia
at all, but just your memory-anchored dispositions to react to
them.”


The direct accessibility of qualia is questioned.

“If there are qualia, they are even less accessible to our ken
than we had thought. Not only are the classical intersubjective
comparisons impossible (as the Brainstorm machine shows), but
we cannot tell in our own cases whether our qualia have been
inverted – at least not by introspection.”


“It is surely tempting at this point – especially to
non-philosophers – to decide that this paradoxical result must
be an artifact of some philosophical misanalysis or other, the
sort of thing that might well happen if you took a perfectly
good pre-theoretical notion – our everyday notion of qualia –
and illicitly stretched it beyond the breaking point.”

“The philosophers have made a mess; let them clean it up;
meanwhile we others can get back to work, relying as always on
our sober and unmetaphysical acquaintance with qualia.”


Chase and Sanborn

Chase and Sanborn are coffee tasters working for Maxwell
House.
Chase: “I hate to admit it, but I’m not enjoying this work
anymore. When I came to Maxwell House six years ago, I
thought Maxwell House coffee was the best-tasting coffee in the
world... And we’ve done our job well; the coffee tastes just
the same today as it tasted when I arrived. But, you
know, I no longer like it! My tastes have changed. I’ve
become a more sophisticated coffee drinker. I no longer like
that taste at all.”

Sanborn: “When I arrived here, shortly before you did, I, like
you, thought Maxwell House coffee was tops in flavor. And now
I, like you, really don’t care for the coffee we’re making. But
my tastes haven’t changed; my tasters have changed...
Maxwell House coffee doesn’t taste to me the way it
used to taste...”


There seem to be three possibilities of what changes have
happened to Chase and Sanborn.

(i) The coffee-taste-qualia have stayed constant, but the
attitudes have changed.

(ii) The coffee-taste-qualia have changed (gradually and
imperceptibly), while the attitudes have stayed constant.

(iii) Somewhere between (i) and (ii): both qualia and attitudes
have changed.


Intra-personal comparisons of qualia are possible.

Since we have direct access to qualia, we cannot
make mistakes about our own qualia.


Intuitions:

1. Chase and Sanborn, by introspection, cannot tell their qualia
apart from their attitudes towards their qualia.

What Chase and Sanborn have access to seems to be the
result of two different factors: their qualia, and their
reactions (here, their attitudes) to the qualia.

When the final product changes, they cannot tell which
factor is responsible for the change.

2. We don’t have privileged first-person access to qualia, as we
can make mistakes about our own qualia.


Can there be any empirical evidence?


The gradual post-operative recovery

Chase’s taste bud connections are surgically inverted: after the
surgery, sugar tastes salty, salt taste sour, etc..
But later on, Chase recovered and now on all behavioral and
verbal tests, his performance is indistinguishable from his
pre-surgical performance: now he says sugar is sweet, salt is
salty, etc..


Again, there are three possibilities:

(i) During recovery, Chase’s qualia have changed, while his
judgments about qualia have stayed constant.

(ii) During recovery, Chase’s judgments about qualia have
changed, while his qualia have stayed constant.

(iii) Both have changed.


Suppose recovery is achieved through an adjustment in the memory-accessing process. There are still different possibilities:

(I) Chase’s current qualia remain abnormal, but his memories
of how things used to taste have changed, leading him to no longer notice any anomaly.

(II) Memory-accessing is part of what determines which qualia
are produced. With the adjustment in memory, Chase's qualia are now normal.


Neuroscientists may claim that they can empirically distinguish
the two possibilities. A proposal can be along the following
lines:

We are only conscious of information in the global
workspace. Let’s call properties of perceptual information
in the global workspace “qualia”.

If only the information in the global workspace can be
compared to memory, then there is evidence that Chase's qualia have remained constant.


“Chase or Sanborn might complain – in the company of more
than a few philosophical spokesmen – that these properties the
neurophysiologists choose to call ‘qualia’ are not the qualia they
are speaking of.”


Intuitions:

1. Qualia are not directly accessible.

2. Empirical evidence may be useful for qualia comparisons, if
we adopt a third-person accessible, objective concept of qualia.


In the above cases, we have assumed that qualia are distinct
from reactions to qualia.
Specifically, we have presumed that Chase's coffee-tasting qualia are separate from his reactions to them. Due to this distinction, his statement that he no longer enjoys the coffee does not necessarily imply a change in his coffee-tasting qualia.


A proposal: One’s reactions to experiences are constitutive of
her qualia.

If qualia are understood in this way, both Chase and Sanborn have experienced changes in their qualia.


The experienced beer drinker

No one likes their first sip of beer.
But when she gradually becomes an experienced beer drinker,
she may enjoy drinking beer.


If one’s reactions to experiences constitute her qualia, the quale of the first sip must differ from that of the experienced beer drinker.

If one’s reactions to experiences constitute her qualia, the beer-drinking qualia are depend on one’s attitudes towards the experience.


For a beer-drinking experience, if its quale is an intrinsic
property, what the quale is must only depend on the
experience and nothing else.

If the quale of an experience depends on things other than
the experience itself, it is extrinsic or relational.

Now the beer-drinking qualia depend on one’s attitudes, they are extrinsic propoerties.


A regimentation of the argument

(P1) Either qualia are distinct from one’s reactions to them or
not.

(P2) If they are, qualia are not directly accessible.

(P3) If they are not, qualia are not intrinsic.

(C1) Therefore, qualia are either not directly accessible or not
intrinsic.

(C2) Therefore, the concept of qualia is incoherent.


Dennett’s proposal: We should just give up the idea that
experiences have intrinsic properties.

Cauliflower cure

“someone offers me a pill to cure my
loathing for cauliflower. He promises that after I swallow this
pill cauliflower will taste exactly the same to me as it always
has, but I will like that taste!... I take the pill and it works.”

“Of course I recognize that the taste is (sort of) the same–the
pill hasn’t made cauliflower taste like chocolate cake, after all.”

“But at the same time my experience is so different now that I
resist saying that cauliflower tastes the way it used to taste.

“There is in any event no reason to be cowed into supposing
that my cauliflower experiences have some intrinsic properties
behind, or in addition to, their various dispositional,
reaction-provoking properties.”


Some seemingly intrinsic properties of
experiences had better be treated as extrinsic, and there is no
reason to assume that some properties are special.

Inverting Spectacles

Wearing inverting spectacles makes
one’s visual field upside-down. But after wearing them for
several days, one can adapt to them. Is the adaptation
involving inverting one’s visual field back, or does it happen
elsewhere in the mind?
All these changed and unchanged properties can be extrinsic.
There is no reason to claim that there is some intrinsic property
(changed or unchanged) of such experiences.


Intuitions:

1. At first glance, the direction of visual field sounds like a
quale of our visual experiences.

2. But does our visual field really have a property of
“upside-downness” or “right-side-upness” indenpendent of our
reactions?

3. There is no reason to assume that a certain subclass of
properties of experiences are intrinsic.