LEWIS'S POSSIBLE WORLDS
Required reading

David Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds, sections 1.1-1.3, 1.6-1.9, all of chapter 2, and sections 3.1 and 3.2.
Scott Shalkowski, "The Ontological Ground of the Alethic Modality", section 2.
Optional reading

Divers, "The Analysis of Possibility and the Possibility of Analysis" (esp. § III)
McGinn, "Modal Reality"
Roy, "Worlds and Modality"
Charles Chihara, The Worlds of Possibility: Modal Realism and the Semantics of Modal Logic, chapter 3.
COMBINATORIALISM
Required reading

D. M. Armstrong, A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility, chapters 3-8.
D. M. Armstrong, A World of States of Affairs, chapters 9, 10.
David Lewis, "Critical Notice of D. M. Armstrong, A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility"
Fraser MacBride, "Could Armstrong Have Been a Universal?"
Scott Shalkowski, "The Ontological Ground of the Alethic Modality", section 3.
Optional reading

Holly Thomas, "Combinatorialism and Primitive Modality"
Holly Thomas, "The Principle of Recombination and the Principle of Distinctness"
FICTIONALISM
Required reading

Gideon Rosen, "Modal Fictionalism"
Gideon Rosen, "A Problem for Fictionalism About Possible Worlds"
Ted Sider, "The Ersatz Pluriverse" section IV
Optional reading

Daniel Nolan, "Three Problems for "Strong" Modal Fictionalism"
Daniel Nolan and John Hawthorne, "Reflexive Fictionalisms"
Stuart Brock, "Modal Fictionalism: A Response to Rosen"
Peter Menzies and Philip Pettit, "In Defence of Fictionalism about Possible Worlds"
Bob Hale, "Modal Fictionalism: A Simple Dilemma"
Bob Hale, "A Desperate Fix"
Gideon Rosen, "Modal Fictionalism Fixed"
Harold Noonan, "In Defence of the Letter of Fictionalism"
John Divers, "A Modal Fictionalist Result"
John Divers, "Modal Fictionalism Cannot Deliver Possible Worlds Semantics"
CONVENTIONALISM
Classic views
Required reading

A. J. Ayer, Language, Truth and Logic, chapter 4
Selections from Arthur Pap, Semantics and Necessary Truth
Optional reading

Rudolf Carnap, (something from Meaning and Necessity or The Logical Syntax of Language)
Wilfred Sellars, "Inference and Meaning"
A. C. Ewing, "The Linguistic Theory of A Priori Propositions"
The translation objection
Required reading

Casimir Lewy, chapter 1 from Meaning and Modality
John Ibberson, "Necessity by Convention"
The contingency objection
Required reading

Casimir Lewy, "Logical Necessity"
Valerie and Richard Routley, "Some Bad Arguments for and against Conventionalism"
Quine
Required reading

W. V. O. Quine, "Truth by Convention"
W. V. O. Quine, "Carnap on Logical Truth"
W. V. O. Quine, "Two Dogmas of Empiricism"
Optional reading

Neil Tennant,"Conventional Necessity and the Contingency of Convention"
Paul Grice and Peter Strawson, "In Defense of a Dogma"
Paul Boghossian, "Analyticity Reconsidered"
The challenge from the necessary a posteriori
Required reading

Alan Sidelle, chapters 1 and 2 from Necessity, Essence, and Individuation: a Defense of Conventionalism
David Chalmers, selections from The Conscious Mind
Optional reading

Saul Kripke, selections from Naming and Necessity
Hilary Putnam, "The Meaning of ‘Meaning'"
Lloyd Humberstone and Martin Davies, "Two Notions of Necessity"
Robert Stalnaker, "Assertion"
Eli Hirsch, "Metaphysical Necessity and Conceptual Truth"
The challenge from de re modality
Required reading

W. V. O. Quine, "Three Grades of Modal Involvement"
Kit Fine, "The Problem of De Re Modality"
Optional reading

Tom McKay,"Essentialism in Quantified Modal Logic"
Terence Parsons, "Grades of Essentialism in Quantified Modal Logic"
Recent reductive theories
Required reading

Christopher Peacocke, "Metaphysical Necessity: Understanding, Truth and Epistemology"
Mark Heller, "Property Counterparts in Ersatz Worlds"
Optional reading

Peter Sullivan, "The ‘Modal Extension Principle': A Question About Peacocke's Approach to Modality"
Christopher Peacocke, "The Principle-Based Conception of Modality: Sullivan's Question Addressed"