”it is their right, it is their duty“

杰斐逊

THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
独立宣言
In Congress, July 4, 1776,
大陆会议（一七七六年七月四日）
THE UNANIMOUS DECLARATION OF THE THIRTEEN UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
美利坚合众国十三个州一致通过的宣言
When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bonds which have connected them with another, and to assume among the Powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
在有关人类事务的发展过程中，当一个民族必须解除其和另一个与之有关的民族之间的政治联系，并在世界各国之间，接受自然法则和自然界的造物主的旨意赋予的独立和平等的地位时，出于对人类舆论的尊重，必须把他们不得不独立的原因予以宣布。
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.
我们认为这些真理是不言而喻的：人人生而平等，造物者赋予他们若干不可剥夺的权利，其中包括生命权、自由权和追求幸福的权利。
That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.
为了保障这些权利，人类才在他们之间建立政府，而政府之正当权力，是经被治理者的同意而产生的。
That whenever any form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experience has shown, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object, evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such Government, and to provide new Guards for their future security.
当任何形式的政府对这些目标具破坏作用时，人民便有权利改变或废除它，以建立一个新的政府；其赖以奠基的原则，其组织权力的方式，务使人民认为唯有这样才最可能获得他们的安全和幸福。为了慎重起见，成立多年的政府，是不应当由于轻微和短暂的原因而予以变更的。过去的一切经验也都说明，任何苦难，只要是尚能忍受，人类都宁愿容忍，而无意为了本身的权益便废除他们久已习惯了的政府。但是，当追逐同一目标的一连串滥用职权和强取豪夺发生，证明政府企图把人民置于专制统治之下时，那么人民就有权利，也有义务推翻这个政府，并为他们未来的安全建立新的保障－－
Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former Systems of Government. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these States. To prove this, let Facts be submitted to a candid world.
这就是这些殖民地过去逆来顺受的情况，也是它们不得不改变政府制度的原因。大不列颠国在位国王的历史，是接连不断的伤天害理和强取豪夺的历史，这些暴行的唯一目标，就是想在这些州建立专制的暴政。为了证明所言属实，现把下列事实向公正的世界宣布－－
He has refused his Assent to Laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.
他拒绝批准对公众利益最有益、最必要的法律。
He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws of immediate and pressing importance, unless suspended in their operation till his Assent should be obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
他禁止他的总督们批准迫切而极为必要的法律，要不就把这些法律搁置起来暂不生效，等待他的同意；而一旦这些法律被搁置起来，他对它们就完全置之不理。
He has refused to pass other Laws for the accommodation of large districts of people, unless those people would relinquish the right of Representation in the Legislature, a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.
他拒绝批准便利广大地区人民的其它法律，除非那些人民情愿放弃自己在立法机关中的代表权；但这种权利对他们有无法估量的价值，而且只有暴君才畏惧这种权利。
He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable, and distant from the depository of their public Records, for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.
他把各州立法团体召集到异乎寻常的、极为不便的、远离他们档案库的地方去开会，唯一的目的是使他们疲于奔命，不得不顺从他的意旨。
He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.
他一再解散各州的议会，因为它们以无畏的坚毅态度反对他侵犯人民的权利。
He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be elected; whereby the Legislative powers, incapable of Annihilation, have returned to the People at large for their exercise; the State remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without, and convulsions within.
他在解散各州议会之后，又长期拒绝另选新议会；但立法权是无法取消的，因此这项权力仍由一般人民来行使。其实各州仍然处于危险的境地，既有外来侵略之患，又有发生内乱之忧。
He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these States; for that purpose obstructing the Laws of Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to pass others to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new Appropriations of Lands .
他竭力抑制我们各州增加人口；为此目的，他阻挠外国人入籍法的通过，拒绝批准其它鼓励外国人移居各州的法律，并提高分配新土地的条件。
He has obstructed the Administration of Justice, by refusing his Assent to Laws for establishing Judiciary powers.
他拒绝批准建立司法权力的法律，藉以阻挠司法工作的推行。
He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone, for the tenure of their offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.
他把法官的任期、薪金数额和支付，完全置于他个人意志的支配之下。
He has erected a multitude of New Offices, and sent hither swarms of Officers to harass our People, and eat out their substance.
他建立新官署，派遣大批官员，骚扰我们人民，并耗尽人民必要的生活物质。
He has kept among us, in times of peace, Standing Armies without the Consent of our legislatures.
他在和平时期，未经我们的立法机关同意，就在我们中间维持常备军。
He has affected to render the Military independent of and superior to the Civil power.
他力图使军队独立于民政之外，并凌驾于民政之上。
He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his Assent to their Acts of pretended Legislation:
他同某些人勾结起来把我们置于一种不适合我们的体制且不为我们的法律所承认的管辖之下；他还批准那些人炮制的各种伪法案来达到以下目的：
For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:
在我们中间驻扎大批武装部队；
For protecting them, by a mock Trial, from Punishment for any Murders which they should commit on the Inhabitants of these States:
用假审讯来包庇他们，使他们杀害我们各州居民而仍然逍遥法外；
For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world:
切断我们同世界各地的贸易；
For imposing Taxes on us without our Consent:
未经我们同意便向我们强行征税；
For depriving us in many cases, of the benefits of Trial by Jury:
在许多案件中剥夺我们享有陪审制的权益；
For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for pretended offences:
罗织罪名押送我们到海外去受审；
For abolishing the free System of English Laws in a neighbouring Province, establishing therein an Arbitrary government, and enlarging its Boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these Colonies:
在一个邻省废除英国的自由法制，在那里建立专制政府，并扩大该省的疆界，企图把该省变成既是一个样板又是一个得心应手的工具，以便进而向这里的各殖民地推行同样的极权统治；
For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable Laws, and altering fundamentally the forms of our Governments:
取消我们的宪章，废除我们最宝贵的法律，并且根本上改变我们各州政府的形式；
For suspending our own Legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
中止我们自己的立法机关行使权力，宣称他们自己有权就一切事宜为我们制定法律。
He has abdicated Government here, by declaring us out of his Protection and waging War against us.
他宣布我们已不属他保护之列，并对我们作战，从而放弃了在这里的政务。
He has plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed the Lives of our people.
他在我们的海域大肆掠夺，蹂躏我们沿海地区，焚烧我们的城镇，残害我们人民的生命。
He is at this time transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to compleat the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with circumstances of Cruelty & perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages, and totally unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.
他此时正在运送大批外国佣兵来完成屠杀、破坏和肆虐的老勾当，这种勾当早就开始，其残酷卑劣甚至在最野蛮的时代都难以找到先例。他完全不配作为一个文明国家的元首。
He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken Captive on the high Seas to bear Arms against their Country, to become the executioners of their friends and Brethren, or to fall themselves by their Hands.
他在公海上俘虏我们的同胞，强迫他们拿起武器来反对自己的国家，成为残杀自己亲人和朋友的刽子手，或是死于自己的亲人和朋友的手下。
He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions.
他在我们中间煽动内乱，并且竭力挑唆那些残酷无情、没有开化的印第安人来杀掠我们边疆的居民；而众所周知，印第安人的作战律令是不分男女老幼，一律格杀勿论的。
In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the most humble terms: Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury. A Prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
在这些压迫的每一阶段中，我们都是用最谦卑的言辞请愿改善；但屡次请求所得到的答复是屡次遭受损害。一个君主，当他的品格已打上了暴君行为的烙印时，是不配做自由人民的统治者的。
Nor have We been wanting in attention to our British brethren. We have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpation, which would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our Separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in War, in Peace Friends.
我们不是没有注意我们英国的弟兄。我们时常提醒他们，他们的立法机关企图把无理的管辖权横加到我们的头上。我们也曾把我们移民出这里和在这里定居的情形告诉他们。我们曾经向他们天生的正义感和雅量呼吁，我们恳求他们念在同种同宗的份上，弃绝这些掠夺行为，以免影响彼此的关系和往来。但是他们却对于这种正义和血缘的呼声一直充耳不闻。因此，我们实在不得不宣布和他们脱离，并且以对待世界上其它民族一样的态度对待他们：战即为敌；和则为友。
We, therefore, the Representatives of the United States of America, in General Congress, Assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the Name, and by Authority of the good People of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these United Colonies are, and of Right ought to be Free and Independent States; that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain, is and ought to be totally dissolved; and that as Free and Independent States, they have full Power to levy War, conclude Peace, contract Alliances, establish Commerce, and to do all other Acts and Things which Independent States may of right do. And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the Protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes and our sacred Honor.
因此，我们，在大陆会议上集会的美利坚合众国代表，以各殖民地善良人民的名义并经他们授权，向全世界最崇高的正义呼吁，说明我们的严正意向，同时郑重宣布；这些联合的殖民地是而且有权成为自由和独立的国家，它们取消一切对英国王室效忠的义务，它们和大不列颠国家之间的一切政治关系从此全部断绝，而且必须断绝；作为自由独立的国家，它们完全有权宣战、缔和、结盟、通商和独立国家有权去做的一切行动。为了支持这篇宣言，我们坚决信赖上帝的庇佑，以我们的生命、我们的财产和我们神圣的名誉，彼此宣誓。
JOHN HANCOCK, President [2] 
约翰·汉考克，主席
Attested, CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary
鉴定无误，查尔斯·汤姆森，秘书
New Hampshire: JOSIAH BARTLETT, WILLIAM WHIPPLE, MATTHEW THORNTON
新罕布什尔州：乔赛亚·巴特利特、威廉·惠普尔、马修·桑顿
Massachusetts-Bay: SAMUEL ADAMS, JOHN ADAMS, ROBERT TREAT PAINE, ELBRIDGE GERRY
马萨诸塞州：塞缪尔·亚当斯、约翰·亚当斯、罗伯特·特里特·佩因、埃尔布里奇·格里
Rhode Island: STEPHEN HOPKINS, WILLIAM ELLERY
罗得岛州：斯蒂芬·霍普金斯、威廉·埃勒里
Connecticut: ROGER SHERMAN, SAMUEL HUNTINGTON, WILLIAM WILLIAMS, OLIVER WOLCOTT
康涅狄格州：罗杰·谢尔曼、塞缪尔·亨廷顿、威廉·威廉姆斯、奥利弗·沃尔科特
Georgia: BUTTON GWINNETT, LYMAN HALL, GEO. WALTON
佐治亚州：巴顿·格威内特、莱曼·霍尔、乔治·沃尔顿
Maryland: SAMUEL CHASE, WILLIAM PACA, THOMAS STONE, CHARLES CARROLL OF CARROLLTON
马里兰州：塞缪尔·蔡斯、威廉·帕卡、托马斯·斯通、卡罗顿的查尔斯·卡罗尔
Virginia: GEORGE WYTHE, RICHARD HENRY LEE, THOMAS JEFFERSON, BENJAMIN HARRISON, THOMAS NELSON, JR., FRANCIS LIGHTFOOT LEE, CARTER BRAXTON.
弗吉尼亚州：乔治·威思、理查德·亨利·李、托马斯·杰斐逊、本杰明·哈里森、小托马斯·尼尔森、弗朗西斯·莱特富特·李、卡特·布拉克斯顿
New York: WILLIAM FLOYD, PHILIP LIVINGSTON, FRANCIS LEWIS, LEWIS MORRIS
纽约州：威廉·弗洛伊德、菲利普·利文斯顿、弗朗西斯·刘易斯、刘易斯·莫里斯
Pennsylvania: ROBERT MORRIS, BENJAMIN RUSH, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, JOHN MORTON, GEORGE CLYMER, JAMES SMITH, GEORGE TAYLOR, JAMES WILSON, GEORGE ROSS
宾夕法尼亚州：罗伯特·莫里斯、本杰明·拉什、本杰明·富兰克林、约翰·莫顿、乔治·克莱默、詹姆斯·史密斯、乔治·泰勒、詹姆斯·威尔逊、乔治·罗斯
Delaware:GEORGE READ, THOMAS MCKEAN, CAESAR RODNEY
特拉华州：乔治·里德、托马斯·麦肯、凯撒·罗德尼
North Carolina: WILLIAM HOOPER, JOSEPH HEWES, JOHN PENN
北卡罗来纳州：威廉·霍珀、约瑟夫·休斯、约翰·潘
South Carolina: EDWARD RUTLEDGE, THOMAS HEYWARD, JR., THOMAS LYNCH, JR., ARTHUR MIDDLETON
南卡罗来纳州：爱德华·拉特利奇、小托马斯·海沃德、小托马斯·林奇、亚瑟·米德尔顿
New Jersey: RICHARD STOCKTON, JOHN WITHERSPOON, FRANCIS HOPKINSON, JOHN HART, ABRAHAM CLARK
新泽西州：理查德·斯托克顿、约翰·威瑟斯庞、弗朗西斯·霍普金森、约翰·哈特、亚伯拉罕·克拉克