理性决策理论和诺贝尔经济学奖得主：

肯尼斯-阿罗（《社会选择与个人价值》（1951 年））、 

詹姆斯-布坎南、贝克尔和乔治-斯蒂格勒，以及邓肯-布莱克等其ta著名经济学家、 

安东尼-唐斯的《民主的经济理论》.他在书中指出，由于在当今社会，一票对选举的影响接近于零，投票的合理效用似乎微乎其微，很容易被投票的不便抵销） 

William Niskanen、曼瑟尔·奥尔森 和 戈登·图洛克（的政治寻租）

The theory of rational decision and Nobel Prize– winning economists Kenneth Arrow (Social Choice and Individual Values (1951)), 

James Buchanan, Gary Becker, and George Stigler, along with other leading economists such as Duncan Black, 

Anthony Downs (’s An Economic Theory of Democracy. There he notes that because the probability that a single vote will decide an election in today’s socie ties approaches zero, the rational utility of voting would seem to be tiny, and so, one might think, be easily outweighed by the inconvenience of casting a ballot.p.185), 

William Niskanen, Mancur Olson, and Gordon Tullock (political rent seeking in Tullock (1967))

 

尤其是贝克尔研究了社会歧视的经济成本、教育投资的社会效用、某些负面激励措施对遏制犯罪的影响以及婚姻和家庭的新趋势

诺贝尔奖颁奖概述了贝克尔在以下方面的贡献：(i) 歧视的原因和成本，以及将歧视降至最低的最有希望的方法；(ii) 侦查和定罪概率的变化对犯罪的影响，以及与不同类型和持续时间的惩罚相关的效用；(iii) 各种教育和培训对个人、社会和经济的影响；(iv) 家庭的形成、结构和解体。

Becker (1930–2014), the economic costs of social discrimination, the social utility of investments in education, the effect of certain kinds of negative incentives on deterring crime, and emerging trends in marriage and the family.

a summary of Becker’s contributions to (i) the causes and costs of discrimination plus the most promising ways of minimizing it, (ii) the effects on criminal be hav ior of changes in the probabilities of detection and conviction, and the utilities associated with diff erent types and durations of punishment, (iii) the personal, social, and economic effects of vari ous kinds of education and training, and (iv) the formation, structure, and dissolution of families.

Becker’s Nobel Prize lecture in 1992

 

其ta公共选择理论家，包括经济学家乔治-斯蒂格勒（George Stigler，1911-1991 年）。斯蒂格勒怀疑，少数人收益集中显见，而多数人的成本则高度分散且基本无形，这会对监管者产生不好的导向，因此他收集了大量经验证据，证明许多监管措施最终会使行业中的老牌企业受益，而牺牲新进入者和普通大众的利益。1962 年，他和合作者Claire Friedland发现，对电价的监管对抑制电价的作用微乎其微。斯蒂格勒因此获得诺贝尔奖，他的这些观点还影响了 20 世纪 70 年代美国对航空、运输和天然气行业放松管制。斯蒂格勒还因开创了obtaining、组织，和传播信息的经济学而获得诺贝尔奖
other public choice theorists, including the economist, George Stigler (1911– 1991). Suspecting that the same combination of concen trated benefits for the few with highly defused, and largely invisible, costs for the many would generate perverse incentives for regulators, Stigler gathered empirical evidence that much regulation ends up benefiting established players in an industry at the expense of newcomers and the general public. In 1962, he and his coauthor Claire Friedland found that regulation of electricity prices had only a tiny effect on holding down those prices, while in 1971, he argued that in stead of reducing the harmful effects of targeted monopolies, government regulation tended to reinforce them by curtailing competition. In addition to being among the contributions for which Stigler won the Nobel Prize, these ideas influenced the deregulation of the airline, transportation, and natural gas industries in the United States in the 1970s. Stigler was also cited by the Nobel committee for pioneering the economics of obtaining, organizing, and disseminating information.
Soames.183

公共选择理论的创始人、诺贝尔奖获得者詹姆斯-布坎南的诺贝尔演讲：
克努特·维克塞尔对税收和支出的不那么大全，但更有针对性的分析。麦迪逊和维克塞尔都反对任何将国家视为在智慧上优于作为其成员的个人的机体的概念
the founder of public choice theory Nobel laureate James Buchanan (1919–2013)
Knut Wicksell’s less comprehensive, but more focused, analysis of taxation and spending. Both [Madison and Wicksell] rejected any organic conception of the state as superior in wisdom to the individuals who are its members. 
1986 Nobel Prize lecture