Bricker, Phillip 
Ontological Commitment 


The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.) 

Abstract: 1. Quantifier Accounts of Ontological Commitment 
1.1 Quine's Criterion, Preliminaries 
1.2 Relata of Ontological Commitment 
1.3 Quine's Criterion: Extensional Versions 
Quine's Criterion, Extensional Version. A theory T is ontologically committed to Ks iff every domain of quantification that makes the theory true contains at least one K. 
... 
1.4 Quine's Criterion: Metalinguistic Versions 
the world being lost 
1.5 Modal Quantifier Criteria 
1) Modal Entailment Criterion. A theory T is ontologically committed to Ks iff, for every world w, T is true at w only if the domain of w contains at least one K. 
2) Modal Quantifier Criterion. A theory T is ontologically committed to Ks iff, for every world w and every sub-domain of the domain at w, T is true at w with its variables ranging over that sub-domain only if that sub-domain contains at least one K. 
1.6 Evaluating Quantifier Accounts: Sufficiency 
1.6.1 Inclusive Logic/Free Logic 
1.6.2 Substitutional vs. Objectual Quantifiers 
1.6.3 Meinongian Quantifiers 
1.6.4 Realism and Reduction 
1.7 Evaluating Quantifier Accounts: Necessity 
1.7.1 Commitment to Properties or Universals 
1.7.2 Second-Order Languages 
1.7.3 Intensional Languages 
1.7.4 Implicit Commitment: Extrinsic Properties 
1.7.5 Implicit Commitment: Sets and Wholes 
2. Entailment Accounts of Ontological Commitment 
2.1 Overview 
2.2 Modal Entailment Criteria 
2.3 A Priori Entailment Criteria 
3. Truthmaker Accounts of Ontological Commitment
3.1 Overview 
3.2 Deep vs. Shallow Ontological Commitment 
3.3 The Problem of Inessential Predication 
3.4 The Problem of Sufficiency: Implicit Commitment Revisited 
4. Ontological Commitment in Ordinary Language 
4.1 Overview 
4.2 The Method of Paraphrase, and its Problems 
5. Frege and Neo-Fregeanism 
5.1 Frege 
5.2 Neo-Fregeanism 
Hume's Principle. ...? ontological reduction? ...? 
Neo-Fregean Account. Suppose that t is a singular term purporting to refer to objects of kind K. Then any theory truth-conditionally equivalent to a theory containing the term t is ontologically committed to Ks. 
To illustrate: “there are exactly as many forks as knives” is ontologically committed to numbers because it is truth-conditionally equivalent to “the number of forks is identical with the number of knives”, which contains a singular term ‘the number of forks’ which purports to refer to numbers. 
6. Carnap and Neo-Carnapianism 
6.1 Carnap 
6.2 Neo-Carnapianism: Quantifier Variance 
Eli Hirsch‘s realism.compatible.This reality cannot, in and of itself, be ontologically structured; it cannot have a metaphysically privileged division into objects, lest one quantifier be privileged over the others 
vs. 
Carnap's anti-realism 
Bibliography 
Academic Tools 
Other Internet Resources 
Related Entries