Andreas, Holger 
Theoretical Terms in Science 


The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2021 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.) 

Abstract: 1. Two Criteria of Theoreticity
1.1 Reference to Nonobservable Entities and Properties
1.2 Semantic Dependence upon a Scientific Theory
2. Criticisms and Refinements of the Theory-Observation Distinction
2.1 Criticisms
instruments.(Achinstein 1965), excluding the use of instruments and things perceived with glasses(Maxwell 1962), concept.(cf. Putnam 1962).red1 and red2
carnap.relativized to an organism (1936/37: 454n)
theory-laden.Hanson (1958), Feyerabend (1962) and Kuhn (1962)
Schurz (2013: ch. 2.9) defines a criterion of the theory independence of observation in terms of an ostensive learning experiment, and shows how such a criterion helps answer the challenges of theory-ladenness of observation.
2.2 Refinements
a term t is theoretical with respect to a theory T, or for short, a T-term if and only if it is introduced by the theory T at a certain stage in the history of science. O-terms, by contrast, are those that were antecedently available and understood before T was set forth (Lewis 1970; cf. Hempel 1973)
Sneed in his seminal The Logical Structure of Mathematical Physics (1979: ch. II).A term t is theoretical with respect to the theory T, or for short, T-theoretical if and only if any method of determining the extension of t, or some part of that extension, rests on some axiom of T.
It remains to explain what it is for a method m of determining the extension of t to rest upon an axiom ϕ. This relation obtains if and only if the use of m depends on ϕ being a true sentence. In other words, m rests upon ϕ if and only if the hypothetical assumption of ϕ being false or indeterminate would invalidate the use of m in the sense that we would be lacking the commonly presumed justification for using m.
The concepts of classical particle mechanics (henceforth abbreviated by CPM) exemplify well the notions of T-theoreticity and T-non-theoreticity. As has been indicated above, all methods of determining the force acting upon a particle make use of some axiom of classical particle mechanics, such as Newton’s laws of motion or some law about special forces. Hence, force is CPM-theoretical. Measurement of spatial distances, by contrast, is possible without using axioms of CPM. Hence, the concept of spatial distance is CPM-non-theoretical. The concept of mass is less straightforward to classify as we can measure this concept using classical collision mechanics (CCM). Still, it was seen to be CPM-theoretical by the structuralists since CCM appeared reducible to CPM (Balzer et al. 1987: ch. 2).
relativize to theory-nets N
3. Two Problems of Theoretical Terms
3.1 Theoretical Entities
3.1.1 The realist view
3.1.2 Non-realist views
3.1.3 The Pythagorean view
3.2 Theoretical Functions and Relations
4. Formal Accounts
4.1 The Ramsey Sentence
Carnap.TC^R->TC as analytic.criticized by Ketland 2004
4.2 Indirect Interpretation
4.3 Direct Interpretation
4.4 Defining Theoretical Terms
5. Conclusion
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources