
St. Anselm, Cur Deus Homo (or Why God Became Man), a classic statement of the substitution theory of atonement 替代赎罪论

Eschatological Views末世论
- the Augustinians, named after St. Augustine of Hippo (354–430), believe both that God’s redemptive (or electing) love will triumph in the end and that some human sinners will never be reconciled to God, they finally reject the idea that God’s redemptive love extends to all human sinners equally
Augustine's interpretation of 1 Timothy 2:4.Who will have all men to be saved (Enchiridion, 103) 论信望爱手册
- the Arminians, named after Jacobus Arminius (1560–1609) for his opposition to the Augustinian understanding of limited election, believe both that God’s redemptive love extends to all human sinners equally and that some of these sinners will never be reconciled to God, they finally reject the idea that God’s redemptive love will triumph in the end
The Arminians therefore hold that God offers his grace to all human beings, though many are those who freely reject it and eventually seal their fate in hell forever.
阿民念派
- the Christian universalists believe both that God’s redemptive love extends to all human sinners equally and that this love will triumph in the end, they finally reject altogether the idea that some human sinners will never be reconciled to God
普救论者
the Fifth General Council of the Christian church condemned the doctrine of universal reconciliation in 553 CE

hell
the idea that hell is a realm where the wicked receive retribution in the form of everlasting torment, with the idea that they will simply be annihilated in the end 
Augustine, Jonathan Edwards: “In hell God manifests his being and perfections only in hatred and wrath, and hatred without love” (Edwards 1738, Charity and Its Fruits, 390)
“When the saints in glory … shall see how miserable others of their fellow-creatures are, who were naturally in the same circumstances with themselves; when they shall see the smoke of their torment, and the raging of the flames of their burning, and hear their dolorous shrieks and cries, and consider that they [the saints] in the mean time are in the most blissful state and shall surely be in it to all eternity; how will they rejoice!” (Edwards “The End of the Wicked Contemplated by the Righteous: Or, the Torments of the Wicked in Hell, No Occasion of Grief to the Saints in Heaven”, sec. II)
v.
the idea that they create their own hell by rejecting God, and with the idea that God will simply make them as comfortable as possible in hell even as God graciously limits the harm they can do to each other
Richard Swinburne suggests that “once our will is fixed for bad, we shall never [again] desire or seek what we have missed” because we have made an “irrevocable choice of character” (Swinburne 1989, Responsibility and Atonement,Oxford University Press, 199), interpretations of Kierkegaard
Molinism, Luis de Molina, 1535-1600.middle knowledge. a perfect knowledge of what a person would have done freely in circumstances.
- seeks to reconcile the concepts of divine foreknowledge, God’s omniscience, and human free will.
William Lane Craig 1989
Δ Bernard Williams.Tedium of Immortality.Williams, Bernard, 1973, “The Makropulos Case: Reflections on the Tedium of Immortality”.

sin
primal sin
Original sin: “For … the whole human race,” he insisted, “was condemned in its apostate head by a divine judgment so just that even if not a single member of the race were ever saved from it, no one could rail against God’s justice” (Enchiridion, 99); 
[through Adam’s sin, the whole human race is now] bound by the chain of death and justly condemned, …lead by a succession of miseries from its depraved origin, as from a corrupt root. (City of God, XIII.14)
Calvin 1536, Institutes of the Christian Religion, Bk. II, Ch. I, sec. 7 加尔文《基督教要义》.
原罪.
even infants, Augustine, On Merit and the Forgiveness of Sins, and the Baptism of Infants, Bk. I, Ch. 21; Calvin 1536, Bk. II, Ch. I, sec. 8
“Man … produced depraved and condemned children. For we were all in that one man, since we were all that one man who fell into sin” (City of God, Bk. XIII, Ch. 14)

The problem of evil (J. L. Mackie, etc.).
Free will defense.Alvin Plantinga

M. Adams (Robert Merrihew Adams), Quinn (Philip L. Quinn), etc.
SEP.Heaven and Hell in Christian Thought
SEP.Sin in Christian Thought

Bultmann, Crossan.Jesus an ordinary man vs. Wright  
布尔特曼《耶稣基督与神话学》上帝之国作为一种末世论（Eschatologie）在约翰那里就已经被解神话化了：约翰解神话化：信教的人已获得了永恒的生命，这也是解神话化的依据；存在主义的解释学 
布尔特曼等 生存神学与末世论 1995 朱雁冰（译）, 李哲汇 / (Ed.)  上海三联书店 
