
Maddy, Penelope / Väänänen, Jouko 
Philosophical Uses of Categoricity Arguments 
2022-03 


Abstract: The paper examines Dedekind 1888, Zermelo 1930, Kreisel 1967, 1969, Parsons 1990 and Button and Walsh. 
One thing interesting to note is that Dedekind allows ‘different things’ to be ‘considered from a common point of view [and] associated in the mind’ so as to form a set (§2, p. 797) and realize the dangers of this free use, but he remains confident. 
Another thing to be noticed is that Dedekind works within set-theoretic background theory rather than a second order one, while the latter involves semantic notions ("N satisfies the axiom 'there is no x such that S(x)=0'"), the former does not("there is no x ∊ N such that S(x)=0"). 
For Zermelo's paper, the things should be noted is that Kanamori points out that Foundation must be second-order in the absence of Infinity and that there is no sharp distinction between language and meaning in Zermelo (as Ebbinghaus points out). 
Besides, Zermelo's quasi-categoricity theorem can be proved in a first order ZFC restricted to _2-separation and _2 replacement background theory (Barwise 1972) (as long as the two models, N and N' involved satisfy the second-order ZF') 
Why Zermelo does not include Infinity in his ZF'? The reason is that he want to start from a point which even intuitionist wold accept (the hereditarily finite sets). And then he argues that without the existence of , we would not retain what is valuable in the set theory. 
Zermelo addresses the contradictions, saying that they are only apparent 'contradictions', due to a confusion between 'set theory itself ... and the individual models representing it'. 
Kreisel is often taken to have argued that the fact that ZFC^2models CH or ZFC^2models lnot CH shows that CH has a determinate truth vlue. However, we see that Kreisel holds the oppositie view. He already knew the dependence of second-order quantifiers on the power set operations, which we worry about. He argues that for such worry to work, the circle has to be a vicious one. Kreisel's own example is the suspction of the semantic notion of first-order consequence the relieving of the suspicion by the equivalence of the semantic notion with a syntactic one. And the two reasons for suspecting a vicious circle, based on predicativism and finitism, repectively, are both 'quite inconclusive'. (1969, p.96) 
Although Kreisel regards the standard argument from the determinateness of second-order logic to that of CH as viciously circular, he also suggests that the use of a concept may illuminte the concept in a way similar to the use of logical particles to advance an account of the satisfaction conditions for sentences containing the logical particles. 
As for Parsons, he refuse to move to second-order, suggesting the open-ended schematic induction ('induction as an inference that could be made with any well-defined predicate, without the prospect of specifying exactly what the range of such predicates is' (pp. 272-3)). 
He considers whether two people, one's language is built on the vocabulary N_1,S_1,0_1\ and the other N_2,S_2,0_2\, have the same "natural numbers". Parsons introduces a isomorphic function by recursion on N_1: 
(0_1)=0_2 
(S_1(x))=S_2((x)) 
then shows φ is one-to-one by applying N_1-induction to ∀ m ((n)=(m)→ n=m), and shows onto by applying N_2-induction to ∃ m ((m)=n). However, there's no explanation how he generates φ without faaling back on some version of _1^1 comprehension and a second-order iduction axiom. 
By encoding, we can prove a first-order internal categoricity theorem for PA: PA ∪ PA_1(N_1) ∪ PA_2(N_2) ⊢ ISO(N_1,N_2). Compared to the second-order internal categoricity theorem, there is an extra PA on the left-hand side, which is required to play the role of the second-order comprehension, with which one simply assumed that the second-order quantifier includes an item for every formula in the combined vocabularies. 
Another option is to consider two copies of PA with the same domain. 
Harty Field comes up with the trouble that when one tries to apply another's terms induction, say N*_2-induction on n to ∃ m ((m)=n), one is not assured that another guy can access to a function, g, such that g^* is phi. 
('Field naturally agrees, but he has a method of his own that purports to establish the determinateness of our numbers. This doesn’t involve categoricity.') 
Setting this issue aside, Parsons admits that one's ability to prove another's numbers isomorphic to her own, does not show that their numbers are standard. So there is still a possibility that our concept of number is vague. 
Some developmental psychology experiments shows that a significant portion of educated young people are "feasibilists" - they think large numbers will behave differently from small numbers. The interconnections between sorities paradox and feasible numbers have been investigated philosophically by Dummett and Walter Dean. 
At last, we come to the part of Button and Walsh. Button and Walsh consider a position, internalism, as the opposite of modelism. We learn that "internalism is not if-thenism - because the antecedent is asserted unconditionally - not platonism - because no stand is taken on the nature of the pre-theoretic metaphysics of structures - and not logicism - because it has no epistemological ambitions." They draw the conclusion that form an internalist point of view, the second-order (quasi-)categrocity theorem gives a rather positive answer to the question "does CH have a determinate truth value?" 
Although internal categoricity result shows cannot show a unique L-structure in the model-theorist’s sense. It can show "intolerance": ⊢ ∀N0S(PA^2(N) → φ^(N)(0, S)) ∨ ∀N0S(PA^2(N) → ¬φ^(N)(0, S))). And intolerance of ZF^2 fixing the number of inaccessibles can be shown. 
However, the authors argue that the question "does CH have a determinate truth value?" (a semantic question) is not the right question proofist should ask. Instead, the question that arises for them is whether an axiom which implies CH or its negation will occur to the community. And this question, has nothing to do with categoricity. 