


The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle



11 



Enter Lieutenant M a m i y a 
* 
What Came from the Warm Mud 
* 
Eau de Cologne 



Three days later, Tokutaro Mamiya called. At seven- thirty in the morning. I was 
eating breakfast with Kumiko at the time. 
"I am very, very sorry to be calling you so early in the morning. I do hope I haven't 
awakened you," said Mr. Mamiya, sounding genuinely apologetic. 
I assured him that it was all right: I woke up every morning shortly after six. 
He thanked me for my postcard and explained that he wanted to reach me before I left 
for work this morning, adding that he would be most grateful if I could see him briefly 
today during my lunch break. He was hoping to take an evening bullet train back to 
Hiroshima. He had planned to have more time here, he said, but something had come up 
that made it necessary for him to return home as soon as possible. 
I pointed out that I was presently unemployed, that I was free all day, and that I could 
see him at his convenience, be it morning, noon, after noon, or whenever. 
"But surely you must have something planned at some point in the day?" he inquired 
with the utmost politeness. 
I had no plan at all, I replied. 
"That being the case, might I be permitted to call upon you at your residence this 
morning at ten o'clock?" 
"That would be fine." 

Only after I hung up did it occur to me that I had forgotten to tell him how to find our 
house from the station. Oh, well, I figured, he knows the address; he can make his way 
here if he wants to. 
"Who was that?" asked Kumiko. 
"The guy who's distributing Mr. Honda's keepsakes. He's going to bring mine here 
later this morning." 
"No kidding?" She took a sip of coffee and spread butter on her toast. "That's very 
nice of him." 
"Sure is." 
"By the way," she said, "shouldn't we-or at least you-go to pay our respects at Mr. 
Honda's: burn a stick of incense, that sort of thing?" 
"Good idea. I'll ask him about that." 
Preparing to leave the house, Kumiko asked me to zip her dress up. It was a tight fit, 
and closing the zipper took some doing. She was wearing a lovely fragrance behind her 
ears-something perfect for a summer morning. "New cologne?" I asked. Instead of 
answering, she glanced at her watch and reached up to fix her hair. 
"I'm late," she said, and took her handbag from the table. 



I had straightened up the little room that Kumiko used for work and was emptying the 
wastebasket when I noticed a yellow ribbon she had discarded. It was peeking out from 
under a crumpled sheet of writin g paper and a few pieces of junk mail. Its bright, glossy 
yellow was what had caught my eye. It was the kind of ribbon used to wrap presents, the 
bow tied in the shape of a flower. I lifted it from the wastebasket and examined it. The 
ribbon had been discarded along with some wrapping paper from the Matsuya department 
store. Under the paper was a box with the Christian Dior label. The lining inside the box 
formed the shape of a bottle. Judging from the box, this had been a pretty expensive item. 
I took it with me to the bathroom and opened Kumiko's cosmetics cabinet. Inside was a 
virtually unused bottle of Christian Dior eau de cologne, shaped like the hollow in the 
box. I opened the bottle's gold- colored cap and took a sniff. It was the same fragrance I 
had smelled from behind Kumiko's ears. 
I sat on the sofa, drinking the rest of my morning coffee and collecting my thoughts. 
Someone had obviously given Kumiko a gift. An expensive gift. Bought it at the Matsuya 
department store and had it wrapped with a ribbon. If the person who did this was a man, 
he was someone close to Kumiko. Men didn't give women (especially married women) 
cologne unless their relationship was a close one. If a woman friend had given it to her ... 
But did women give eau de cologne to other women? I could not be sure. One thing I 
could be sure of, though, was that there was no particular reason for Kumiko to be 
receiving presents from other people at this time of year. Her birthday was in May. So 
was our anniver sary. She might conceivably have bought herself a bottle of cologne and 
had it wrapped with a pretty ribbon. But why? 
I sighed and looked at the ceiling. 
Should I ask her about it directly? "Did somebody give you that cologne?" She might 
answer: "Oh, that. One of the girls at work had a personal problem I helped her out with. 
It's too long a story to go into, but she was in a jam, so I did it to be nice. This was a 

thank- you gift. Wonderful fragrance, don't you think? It's expensive stuff!" 
OK, that makes sense. That does it. No need to ask the question. No need to be 
concerned. 
Except I was concerned. She should have said something to me about it. If she had 
time to go to her room, untie the ribbon, tear off the wrap ping paper, open the box, throw 
all three in the wastebasket, and put the bottle in her cosmetics cabinet, she should have 
been able to come to me and say, "Look at this present I got from one of the girls at 
work." Instead, she had said nothing. Maybe she had thought it wasn't worth mentioning. 
Now, however, it had taken on the thin veil of secrecy. That was what was bothering me. 
I looked at the ceiling for a long time. I tried to think about something else, but my 
mind wouldn't cooperate. I kept thinking about Kumiko at the moment I zipped up her 
dress: her smooth white back, the fragrance behind her ears. For the first time in months, 
I wanted a smoke. I wanted to put a cigarette in my mouth, light the tip, and suck the 
smoke into my lungs. That would have calmed me down somewhat. But I didn't have any 
cigarettes. I found a lemon drop and sucked on that. 
At ten of ten, the phone rang. I assumed it was Lieutenant Mamiya. This house was 
not easy to find. Even people who had been here more than once got lost sometimes. But 
the call was not from Lieutenant Mamiya. Wha t I heard coming from the receiver was the 
voice of the enigmatic woman who had phoned me the other day. 
"Hi, honey, it's been a while," she said. "How'd you like it last time? Did I get you 
going a little bit? Why'd you hang up on me? And just when things were getting 
interesting!" 
For a split second, I thought she was talking about my recent wet dream of Kano. But 
that had been a different story. She was talking about the day she called me when I was 
cooking spaghetti. 
"Sorry," I said, "but I'm pretty busy right now. I'm expecting a visitor in ten minutes, 
and I've got to get the place ready." 
"You're awfully busy for somebody who's supposed to be out of work," she said, 
with a sarcastic edge. The same thing had happened last time: her tone of voice changed 
from one second to the next. "You're cooking spaghetti, you're expecting a visitor. But 
that's all right. All we need is ten minutes. Let's talk for ten minutes, just you and me. 
You can hang up when your guest arrives." 
I wanted to hang up without saying a word, but I couldn't do it. I was probably still 
upset about Kumiko's cologne. I probably felt like talking to someone, and it didn't much 
matter who. 
"Look," I said, "I don't have any idea who you are." I picked up the pencil lying 
beside the phone and twirled it in my fingers as I spoke. "Are you sure I know you?" 
"Of course you do. I told you last time. I know you and you know me. I wouldn't lie 
about a thing like that. I don't have time to waste calling complete strangers. You must 
have some kind of blind spot in your memory." 
"I don't know about that. Really, though- " 
"Enough," she said, cutting me off. "Stop thinking so much. You know me and I 
know you. The important thing is- well, look at it this way: I'm going to be very nice to 
you. But you do n't have to do a thing. Isn't that marvelous? You don't have to do a thing, 
you have no responsibilities, and I do everything. Everything. Don't you think that's 
great? So stop thinking so much. Stop making everything so complicated. Empty yourself 

out. P retend you're lying in some nice, soft mud on a warm spring afternoon." 
I kept silent. 
"You're asleep. You're dreaming. You're lying in nice, warm mud. For get about your 
wife. Forget you're out of work. Forget about the future. Forget about everything. We all 
come out of the warm mud, and we all go back to it. Finally- Oh, by the way, Mr. Okada, 
when was the last time you had sex with your wife? Do you remember? Quite some time 
ago, wasn't it? Yes, indeed, maybe two weeks now." 
"Sorry, my visitor is here," I said. 
"More than two weeks, wasn't it? I can tell from your voice. Three weeks, maybe?" 
I said nothing. 
"Oh, well, never mind," she said, her voice like a little broom sweep ing off the dust 
that had piled up on the slats of a Venetian blind. "That's between you and your wife. But 
I will give you everything you want. And you, Mr. Okada, you need have no 
responsibilities in return. Just go round the corner, and there it is: a world you've never 
seen. I told you you have a blind spot, didn't I? You still don't understand." 
Gripping the receiver, I maintained my silence. 
"Look around," she said. "Look all around you and tell me what's there. What is it 
you see?" 
Just then the doorbell rang. Relieved, I hung up without a word. 



Lieutenant Mamiya was a bald old gentleman of exceptional height, who wore gold-
rimmed glasses. He had the tan, healthy look of a man who has done his share of manual 
labor, without an ounce of excess flesh. Three deep wrinkles marked the corner of each 
eye with perfect symmetry, as if he were on the verge of squinting because he found the 
light harsh. It was difficult to tell his age, though he was certainly no less than seventy. I 
imagined he must have been a strapping fellow in his prime. This was obvio us from his 
erect carriage and efficient movements. His demeanor and speech were of the utmost 
respectfulness, but rather than elaborate formality, this gave an impression of unadorned 
precision. The lieutenant appeared to be a man accustomed to making his own decisions 
and taking responsibility for them. He wore an unremarkable light- gray suit, a. white 
shirt, and a gray and black striped tie. The no - nonsense suit ap peared to be made of a 
material that was a bit too thick for a hot and humid June morning, but the lieutenant was 
unmarked by a drop of sweat. He had a prosthetic left hand, on which he wore a thin 
glove of the same light- gray color as the suit. Encased in this gray glove, the artificial 
hand looked especially cold and inorganic when compared with the tanned and hairy 
right hand, from which dangled a cloth-wrapped bundle, knotted at the top. 
I showed him to the living room couch and served him a cup of green tea. 
He apologized for not having a name card. "I used to teach social studies in a rural 
public high school in Hiroshima Prefecture, but I haven't done anything since I retired. I 
raise a few vegetables, more as a hobby than anything, just simple farm work. For that 
reason, I do not happen to carry a name card, although I realize it is t erribly rude of me." 
I didn't have a name card, either. 
"Forgive me, but I wonder how old you might be, Mr. Okada?" 
"I'm thirty," I said. 

He nodded. Then he took a sip of tea. I had no idea what it meant to him that I was 
thirty years old. 
"This is such a nice, quiet home you live in," he said, as if to change the subject. 
I told him how I came to be renting it from my uncle for so little. Ordinarily, with our 
income, we couldn't afford to live in a house half the size, I added. Nodding, he stole a 
few hesitant glances around the place. I followed his lead and did the same. Look all 
around you, the woman's voice had ordered me. Taking this newly conscious look at my 
surroundings, I found a certain coldness in the pervading atmosphere. 
"I have been in Tokyo two weeks altogether on this trip," said Lieutenant Mamiya, 
"and you are the very last person to whom I am distrib uting a keepsake. Now I feel I can 
go back to Hiroshima." 
"I was hoping I could visit Mr. Honda's home and perhaps burn a stick of incense in 
his memory," I said. 
"That is a most laudable intention, but Mr. Honda's home- and now his grave-are in 
Asahikawa, Hokkaido. The family came from Asahikawa to sort out the things he left in 
his house in Meguro, and now they have gone back. There is nothing left." 
"I see," I said. "So Mr. Honda was living alone in Tokyo, then, far away from his 
family." 
"That is correct. The eldest son, who lives in Asahikawa, was concerned about 
leaving his old father to live by himself in the big city, and he knew that it did not look 
very good. Apparently, he tried to persuade his father to come and live with him, but Mr. 
Honda simply refused." 
"He had a son?" I asked, somewhat taken aback. I had always thought of Mr. Honda 
as utterly alone in the world. "Then I assume Mr. Honda's wife must have passed away 
some time ago." 
"Well, that is a rather complicated story. Mrs. Honda committed a lovers' suicide 
with another man after the war. In 1950 or 1951,1 believe. The details of that event are 
not something that I would know about. Mr. Honda never said too much about it, and of 
course I was in no position to ask." 
I nodded. 
"After that, Mr. Honda raised his children alone-one son and one daughter. When 
they became independent, he moved to Tokyo by himself and began his work as a 
diviner, which is how you knew him." 
"What sort of work did he do in Asahikawa?" 
"He was partners with his brother in a printing business." I tried to imagine Mr. 
Honda standing in front of a printing press in coveralls, checking proof, but to me Mr. 
Honda was a slightly grimy old man in a grimy old kimono with a sash more suited to a 
sleeping robe, who sat, winter and summer, with his legs in the sunken hearth, playing 
with his divining sticks atop his low table. 
With deft movements, Lieutenant Mamiya used his good hand to untie the cloth 
bundle he had brought with him. A package emerged, shaped like a small box of candy. It 
was wrapped in kraft paper and tightly tied in several loops of string. The lieutenant 
placed it on the table and slid it toward me. 
"This is the keepsake that Mr. Honda left with me to give to you," he said. 
I picked it up. It weighed practically nothing. I couldn't begin to imagine what was 
inside. 

"Shall I just go ahead and open it?" I asked. 
Lieutenant Mamiya shook his head. "I am sorry, but Mr. Honda indicated that he 
wished you to open it when you were alone." I nodded and returned the package to the 
table. "In fact," said Lieutenant Mamiya, "I received the letter from Mr. Honda exactly 
one day before he died. It said something like this: 'I am going to die very soon. I am not 
the least bit afraid of dying. This is the span of life that has been allotted to me by the will 
of Heaven, Where the will of Heaven is concerned, all one can do is submit to it. There 
is, however, something that I have left undone. In my closet there are various objects-
things that I have wanted to pass on to certain people. Now it appears that I will not be 
able to accomplish that task. Which is why I would be most grateful if you would help 
me by distributing the keepsakes on the attached list. I fully realize how presumptuous 
this is of me, but I do hope that you will be so kind as to think of it as my dying wish and 
exert yourself this one last time for my sake.' 
I must say, I was utterly shocked to receive such a letter from Mr. Honda. I had been 
out of touch with him for years-perhaps six or seven years without a word. I wrote back 
to him immediately, but my reply crossed in the mails with the no tice from his son that 
Mr. Honda had died." He took a sip of his green tea. 
"Mr. Honda knew exactly when he was going to die," Lieutenant Mamiya continued. 
"He must have attained a state of mind that someone like me could never hope to reach. 
As you said in your postcard, there was something about him that moved people deeply. I 
felt that from the time I first met him, in the summer of 1938." 
"Oh, were you in the same unit with Mr. Honda at the time of the Nomonhan 
Incident?" 
"No, I wasn't," said Lieutenant Mamiya, biting his lip. "We were in different units-
different divisions, even. We worked together in a small- scale military operation that 
preceded the Nomonhan battle. Corporal Honda was later wounded at Nomonhan and 
sent back to Japan. I didn't go to Nomonhan. I lost this hand of mine"-and here 
Lieutenant Mamiya held up his gloved left hand- "in the Soviet advance of August 1945, 
the month the war ended. I caught a slug in the shoulder from a heavy ma chine gun 
during a battle against a tank unit. I was on the ground, unconscious, when a Soviet tank 
ran over my hand. I was taken prisoner, treated in a hospital in Chita, and sent to an 
internment camp in Siberia. They kept me there until 1949.1 was on the continent for 
twelve years altogether from the time they sent me over in 1937, never set foot on 
Japanese soil the whole time. My family thought I had been killed fighting the Soviets. 
They made a grave for me in the village cemetery. I had a k ind of understanding with a 
girl there before I left Japan, but by the time I got back she was already married to 
another man. Twelve years is a long time." 
I nodded. 
"I'm sorry, Mr. Okada," he said. "This talk about the old days must be boring to a 
young fellow like you. I would like to add one more thing, though. And that is that we 
were just ordinary young men, the same as you. I never once thought I wanted to be a 
soldier. I wanted to be a teacher. As soon as I left college, though, they sent me my draft 
notice, stuck me in officers training, and I ended up on the continent for twelve years. My 
life went by like a dream." Lieutenant Mamiya clamped his mouth shut. 
"If you wouldn't mind," I said, after some time had passed, "I would very much like 
to hear the story of how you and Mr. Honda came to know each other." I genuinely 

wanted to know what kind of man Mr. Honda had been before I met him. 
Hands placed precisely on his knees, Lieutenant Mamiya sat thinking about 
something. Not that he was uncertain as to what he should do. He was just thinking. 
"That story might be a long one," he said. 
"I don't mind," I said. 
"I've never told it to anyone. And I'm quite certain that Mr. Honda never told it to 
anyone, either. The reason I say that is that we ... made a pact... to keep this one thing 
secret. But Mr. Honda is dead now. I'm the only one left. It wouldn't hurt anyone if I 
told." 
And so Lieutenant Mamiya began to tell me his story.

