


The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle



1 



As Concrete as Possible 

* 

Appetite in Literature 



Kumiko never came back that night. I stayed up until midnight, reading, listening to music, 
and waiting for her, but finally I gave up and went to bed. I fell asleep with the light on. It was 


six in the morning when I woke. The full light of day shone outside the window. Beyond the 
thin curtain, birds were chirping. There was no sign of my wife beside me in bed. The white 
pillow lay there, high and fluffy. As far as I could see, no head had rested on it during the 
night. Her freshly washed, neatly folded summer pajamas lay atop the night table. I had 
washed them. I had folded them. I turned off the lamp beside my pillow and took a deep 
breath, as if to regulate the flow of time. 
I did a tour of the house in my pajamas. I went first to the kitchen, then surveyed the 
living room and looked into Kumiko's room. I checked the bathroom and, just to make sure, 
tried the closets. There was no sign of her anywhere. The house seemed more hushed than 
usual. I felt as if, by moving around, I alone was to blame for disrupting the quiet harmony of 
the place, and for no good reason. 
There was nothing more for me to do. I went to the kitchen, filled the kettle, and lit the 
gas. When the water boiled, I made coffee and sat at the kitchen table to take a sip. Then I 
made toast and ate some potato salad from the refrigerator. This was the first time in years 
that I had eaten breakfast alone. Come to think of it, aside from a single business trip, we had 
never once missed breakfast together in all the time since our marriage. We had often missed 
lunch, and sometimes even dinner, but never breakfast. We had a kind of tacit understanding 
about breakfast: it was almost a ritual for us. No matter how late we might go to bed, we 
would always get up early enough to fix a proper morning meal and take the time to enjoy it 
together. 
But that morning Kumiko was gone. I drank my coffee and ate my toast alone, in silence. 
An empty chair was all I had to look at. I looked and ate and thought about the cologne that 
she had been wearing the morning before. I thought about the man who might have given it to 
her. I thought about her lying in a bed somewhere with him, their arms wrapped around each 
other. I saw his hands caressing her naked body. I saw the porcelain of her back as I had seen 
it in the morning, the smooth skin beneath the rising zipper. 
The coffee seemed to have a soapy taste. I couldn't quite believe it. Shortly after the first 
sip, I sensed an unpleasant aftertaste. I wondered if my feelings were playing tricks on me, but 
the second sip had the same taste. I emptied the cup into the sink and poured myself more 
coffee, in a clean cup. Again the taste of soap. I couldn't imagine why. I had washed the pot 
well, and there was nothing wrong with the water. But the taste- or smell-was unmistakable: it 
could only have been soap-or possibly moisturizing lotion. I threw out all the coffee in the pot 
and started to boil some more water, but it just wasn't worth the trouble. I filled a cup with 
water from the tap and drank that instead. I really didn't want coffee all that much anyway. 



I waited until nine-thirty and dialed Kumiko's office. A woman answered the phone. 
"May I please speak to Kumiko Okada?" I asked. 
"I'm sorry, but she doesn't seem to be here yet." 
I thanked her and hung up. Then I started ironing shirts, as I always did when I felt 
restless. When I ran out of shirts, I tied up old newspapers and magazines, wiped down the 
sink and cabinet shelves, cleaned the toilet and bathtub. I polished the mirrors and windows 
with glass cleaner. I unscrewed the ceiling fixtures and washed the frosted glass. I stripped the 
sheets and threw them in the washing machine, then put on fresh ones. 
At eleven o'clock I called the office again. The same girl answered, and again she told me 
that Kumiko had not come in. 
"Was she planning to miss work today?" I asked. 
"Not to my knowledge," she said, without a trace of feeling. She was just reporting the 
facts. 
Something was out of the ordinary if Kumiko had still not reported to work at eleven 


o'clock. Most publishers' editorial offices kept irregular hours, but not Kumiko's company. 
Producing magazines on health and natural foods, they had to deal with the kind of writers 
and other professionals- food producers, farmers, doctors-who went to work early in the 
morning and home in the evening. To accommodate them, Kumiko and her colleagues 
reported to the company at nine o'clock sharp and left by five, unless there was some special 
reason to stay later. 
Hanging up, I went to the bedroom and looked through her closet. If she had run off, 
Kumiko should have taken her clothes. I checked the dresses and blouses and skirts that were 
hanging there. Of course, I didn't know every piece of clothing she owned-I didn't know 
every piece of clothing that I owned-but I often took her things to the cleaner's and picked 
them up for her, so I had a pretty good grasp of which items she wore most often and which 
were most important to her, and as far as I could tell, just about everything was there. 
Besides, she had had no opportunity to take a lot of clothes with her. I tried to recall as 
precisely as possible her departure from the house the day before-the clothes she wore, the 
bag she carried. All she had had with her was the shoulder bag she always carried to work, 
stuffed with notebooks and cosmetics and her wallet and pens and a handkerchief and tissues. 
A change of clothing would never have fit inside. 
I looked through her dresser drawers. Accessories, stockings, sunglasses, panties, cotton 
tops: everything was there, arranged in neat rows. If anything had disappeared, it was 
impossible for me to tell. Panties and stockings, of course, she could have managed to take in 
her shoulder bag, but come to think of it, why would she have bothered? Those she could 
have picked up anywhere. 
I went back to the bathroom for another look at her vanity drawers. No sign of change 
there, either: just a lot of little cosmetics containers and accessories stuffed inside. I opened 
the bottle of Christian Dior cologne and took another sniff. It smelled the same as before: the 
fragrance of a white flower, perfect for a summer morning. Again I thought of her ears and 
her white back. 
I went to the living room and stretched out on the sofa. I closed my eyes and listened. 
Virtually the only sound I could hear was that of the clock ticking off time. There were no car 
noises or birds chirping. I had no idea what to do now. I decided to call her office again and 
got as far as lifting the receiver and dialing the first few numbers, but the thought of having to 
talk to that same girl was too much for me, and I put the receiver back. There was nothing 
more for me to do. I could only wait. Perhaps it was true that Kumiko was leaving me-for 
what reason I did not know, but it was at least a possibility. Even if it was true, though, she 
was not the kind of person who would leave without a word. She would do her best to explain 
her exact reasons as precisely as possible. Of that I was one hundred percent certain. 
Or, then, there might have been an accident. She might have been run down by a car and 
rushed to the hospital. She could be unconscious at that moment and receiving a transfusion. 
The thought made my heart pound, but I knew that she was carrying her license and credit 
cards and address book. The hospital or the police would have contacted me by now. 
I went to sit on the veranda and look at the garden, but in fact, I didn't look at anything. I 
tried to think, but I couldn't concentrate my attention on any one thing. All that came to mind, 
again and again, was Kumiko's back as I raised the zipper of her dress-her back, and the smell 
of the cologne behind her ears. 
After one o'clock, the phone rang. I stood up from the sofa and lifted the receiver. 
"Pardon me, but would this be Mr. Okada's home?" asked a woman's voice. It was Malta 
Kano. "That's right," I said. 
"My name is Malta Kano. I am calling about the cat." "The cat?" I said with some 
confusion. I had forgotten all about it. Now, of course, I remembered, but it seemed like 
something from ages ago. 
"The cat that Mrs. Okada was searching for," Malta Kano explained. 


"Sure, sure," I said. 
Malta Kano fell silent at her end, as if gauging something. My tone of voice might have 
put her on alert. I cleared my throat and shifted the receiver to my other hand. 
After a short pause, Malta Kano said, "I must tell you, Mr. Okada, I believe that the cat 
will almost certainly never be found. I hate to say this, but the best you can do is resign 
yourself to the fact. It is gone forever. Barring some major change, the cat will never come 
back." 
"Some major change?" I asked. But she did not respond. 
Malta Kano remained silent for a long time. I waited for her to say something, but try as I 
might, I could not hear the smallest breath from her end of the line. Just as I was beginning to 
suspect that the telephone was out of order, she began to speak again. 
"It may be terribly rude of me to say this, Mr. Okada, but aside from the cat, isn't there 
perhaps something with which I can be of help?" 
I could not reply to her immediately. With the receiver in my hand, I leaned back against 
the wall. It took some time for the words to come. 
"Things are still not very clear to me," I said. "I don't know anything for sure. I'm trying 
to work it out in my own mind. But I think my wife has left me." I explained to her that 
Kumiko had not come home the night before or reported to work that morning. 
She seemed to be mulling this over at her end. "You must be very worried," she said. 
"There is nothing I can say at this point, but things should begin to come clear before too 
long. Now all you can do is wait. It must be hard for you, but there is a right time for 
everything. Like the ebb and flow of the tides. No one can do anything to change them. When 
it is time to wait, you must wait." 
"Look, Miss Kano, I'm grateful for the trouble you've taken with the cat and all, but right 
now I'm not exactly in the mood for smooth-sounding generalities. I'm feeling lost. Really 
lost. Something awful is going to happen: I feel it. But I don't know what to do. I have 
absolutely no idea what I should do. Is that clear? I don't even know what I should do after I 
end this call. What I need right now is facts. Concrete facts. I don't care how stupid and 
simple they might be, I'll take any facts I can get-am I making myself clear? I need something 
I can see and touch." 
Through the phone I heard the sound of something falling on the floor: something not 
very heavy-perhaps a single pearl-dropping onto a wooden floor. This was followed by a 
rubbing sound, as if a piece of tracing paper were being held in someone's fingertips and 
given a vigorous yank. These movements seemed to be occurring someplace neither very 
close to nor far from the telephone, but they were apparently of no interest to Malta Kano. 
"I see," she said in a flat, expressionless voice. "Something concrete." 
"That's right. As concrete as possible." 
"Wait for a phone call." 
"Waiting for a phone call is all I've been doing." 
"You should be getting a call soon from a person whose name begins with O." 
"Does this person know something about Kumiko?" 
"That I can't say. I'm just telling you this because you said you would take any concrete 
facts you could get. And here is another one: Before very long, a half-moon will last for 
several days." 
"A half-moon?" I asked. "You mean the moon in the sky?" 
"Yes, Mr. Okada, the moon in the sky. In any case, the thing for you to do is wait. 
Waiting is everything. Goodbye, then. I'll be talking to you again soon." And she hung up. 



I brought our address book from my desk and opened to the Os. There were exactly four 


listings, written in Kumiko's neat little hand. The first was my father, Tadao Okada. Then 
came an old college friend of mine named Onoda, a dentist named Otsuka, and the 
neighborhood Omura liquor store. 
I could forget about the liquor store. It was ten minutes' walk from the house, and aside 
from those rare instances when we would order a case of beer to be delivered, we had no 
special connection with them. The dentist was also irrelevant. I had gone to him for work on a 
molar two years earlier, but Kumiko had never been there. In fact, she had never been to any 
dentist since she married me. My friend Onoda I hadn't seen in years. He had gone to work 
for a bank after college, was transferred to the Sapporo branch in his second year, and had 
been living in Hokkaido ever since. Now he was just one of those people I exchanged New 
Year's cards with. I couldn't remember whether he had ever met Kumiko. 
That left my father, but it was unthinkable that Kumiko would have some special 
relationship with him. He had remarried after my mother's death, and I had not seen him or 
corresponded with him or spoken with him on the telephone in the years since. Kumiko had 
never even met the man. 
Flipping through the address book, I was reminded how little the two of us had had to do 
with other people. Aside from a few useful connections with colleagues, we had had almost 
no relationships outside the house in the six years since our marriage, but instead had lived a 
withdrawn sort of life, just Kumiko and me. 
I decided to make spaghetti for lunch again. Not that I was the least bit hungry. But I 
couldn't just go on sitting on the sofa, waiting for the phone to ring. I had to move my body, 
to begin working toward some goal. I put water in a pot, turned on the gas, and until it boiled 
I would make tomato sauce while listening to an FM broadcast. The radio was playing an 
unaccompanied violin sonata by Bach. The performance itself was excellent, but there was 
something annoying about it. I didn't know whether this was the fault of the violinist or of my 
own present state of mind, but I turned off the music and went on cooking in silence. I heated 
the olive oil, put garlic in the pan, and added minced onions. When these began to brown, I 
added the tomatoes that I had chopped and strained. It was good to be cutting things and 
frying things like this. It gave me a sense of accomplishment that I could feel in my hands. I 
liked the sounds and the smells. 
When the water boiled, I put in the salt and a fistful of spaghetti. I set the timer for ten 
minutes and washed the things in the sink. Even with the finished spaghetti on the plate in 
front of me, though, I felt no desire to eat. I barely managed to finish off half and threw out 
the rest. The leftover sauce I put in a container and stored in the refrigerator. Oh, well, the 
appetite had not been there to begin with. 
Long before, I seemed to recall, I had read some kind of story about a man who keeps 
eating while he waits for something to happen. After thinking long and hard about it, I 
concluded that it was from Hemingway's A Farewell to Arms. The hero (I had forgotten his 
name) manages to escape from Italy to Switzerland by boat, and while he's waiting in this 
little Swiss town for his wife to give birth, he's constantly going to the cafe across the way for 
something to drink or eat. I could hardly remember anything about the plot. What had stuck in 
my mind was this one part near the end, in which the hero goes from meal to meal while wait-
ing in a foreign country for his wife to have her baby. The reason I recalled it so clearly, it 
seemed, was that this part of the book had an intense reality to it. It seemed far more real to 
me, as literature, for the character's anxiety to cause this abnormal upsurge in appetite rather 
than to make him incapable of eating and drinking. 
In contrast to A Farewell to Arms, though, I developed no appetite at all as I watched the 
hands of the clock in this quiet house, waiting for something to happen. And soon the thought 
crossed my mind that my failure to develop an appetite might be owing to the lack within me 
of this kind of literary reality. I felt as if I had become part of a badly written novel, that 
someone was taking me to task for being utterly unreal. And perhaps it was true. 




The phone finally rang, just before two in the afternoon. 
"Is this the Okada residence?" asked an unfamiliar male voice. It was a young man's 
voice, low and smooth. 
"Yes, it is," I answered, my own voice somewhat tense. 
"Block two, number twenty-six?" 
"That's right." 
"This is the Omura liquor store calling. Thank you for your continued patronage. I was 
just about to leave to make my collections, and I wanted to check to see if this was a good 
time for you." "Collections?" 
"Yes, sir. I have you down for two cases of beer and a case of juice." "Oh. Fine. I'll be 
home for a while yet," I said, bringing our conversation to a close. 
After hanging up, I wondered whether that conversation had contained any information 
regarding Kumiko. But viewed from all possible angles, it had been nothing but a short, 
practical call from a liquor store about collections. I had ordered beer and juice from them, 
and they had delivered it, that much was certain. Half an hour later, the fellow came to the 
door, and I paid for two cases of beer and a case of juice. The friendly young man smiled as 
he filled out the receipt. "By the way, Mr. Okada, did you hear about the accident by the sta-
tion this morning? About half past nine." 
"Accident?" I asked with a shock. "Who was in an accident?" "A little girl," he said. "Got 
run over by a van backing up. Hurt bad, too, I hear. I got there just after it happened. It's 
awful to see something like that first thing in the morning. Little kids scare the heck out of 
me: you can't see them in your rearview mirror. You know the cleaner's by the station? It 
happened right in front of his place. People park their bikes there, and all these cartons are 
piled up: you can't see a thing." 
After he left, I felt I couldn't stay in the house a minute longer. All of a sudden, the place 
felt hot and stuffy, dark and cramped. I stepped into my shoes and got out of there as fast as I 
could. I didn't even lock the door. I left the windows open and the kitchen light on. I 
wandered around the neighborhood, sucking on a lemon drop. As I replayed the words of the 
young liquor store employee in my mind, it slowly dawned on me that I had left some clothes 
at the cleaner's by the station. Kumiko's blouse and skirt. The ticket was in the house, but if I 
just went and asked for them, the man would probably let me have them. 
The neighborhood looked a little different to me. The people I passed on the street all had 
an unnatural, even artificial, look to them. I examined each face as I walked by, and I 
wondered what kind of people these could be. What kind of houses did they live in? What 
kind of families did they have? What kind of lives did they lead? Did they sleep with women 
other than their wives, or men other than their husbands? Were they happy? Did they know 
how unnatural and artificial they looked? 
Signs of the morning's accident were still fresh outside the cleaner's: on the ground, the 
police chalk line; nearby, a few shoppers discussing the accident, with grave expressions on 
their faces. Inside, the cleaner's shop looked the same as ever. The same black boom box 
played the same kind of mood music, while in back an old-fashioned air conditioner roared 
along and clouds of steam rose from the iron to the ceiling. The song was "Ebb Tide." Robert 
Maxwell, harp. I thought how wonderful it would be if I could go to the ocean. I imagined the 
smell of the beach and the sound of waves breaking on the shore. Seagulls. Ice-cold cans of 
beer. 
To the owner, I said only that I had forgotten my receipt. "I'm pretty sure I brought them 
in last Friday or Saturday: a blouse and skirt." 
"Okada... Okada ...," he said, and flipped through the pages of a college notebook. "Sure, 
here it is. One blouse, one skirt. But Mrs. Okada picked them up already." 


"She did?" I asked, taken aback. 
"Yesterday morning. I clearly remember handing them to her myself. I figured she was on 
her way to work. Brought the receipt in too." 
I had no words to answer him with. I could only stare at him. 
"Ask the missus," he said. "She's got 'em, no mistake." He took a cigarette from the box 
on the register, put it in his mouth, and lit it with a lighter. 
"Yesterday morning?" I asked. "Not evening?" 
"Morning for sure. Eight o'clock. Your wife was the first customer of the day. I wouldn't 
forget something like that. Hey, when your very first customer is a young woman, it puts you 
in a good mood, know what I mean?" 
I was unable to fake a smile for him, and the voice that came out of me didn't sound like 
my own. "Oh, well, I guess that takes care of that. Sorry, I didn't know she picked them up." 
He nodded and glanced at me, crushed out the cigarette, from which he had taken no more 
than two or three puffs, and went back to his ironing. He seemed to have become interested in 
me, as if he wanted to tell me something but decided in the end to say nothing. And I, 
meanwhile, had things I wanted to ask him. How had Kumiko looked when she came for her 
cleaning? What had she been carrying? But I was confused and very thirsty. What I most 
wanted was to sit down somewhere and have a cold drink. That was the only way I would 
ever be able to think about anything again, I felt. 
I went straight from the cleaner's to the coffeehouse a few doors away and ordered a glass 
of iced tea. The place was cool inside, and I was the only customer. Small wall-mounted 
speakers were playing an orchestrated version of the Beatles' "Eight Days a Week." I thought 
about the seashore again. I imagined myself barefoot and moving along the beach at the 
water's edge. The sand was burning hot, and the wind carried the heavy smell of the tide. I 
inhaled deeply and looked up at the sky. Stretching out my hands, palms upward, I could feel 
the summer sun burning into them. Soon a cold wave washed over my feet. 
Viewed from any angle, it was odd for Kumiko to have picked things up from the 
cleaner's on her way to work. For one thing, she would have had to squeeze onto a jam-
packed commuter train holding freshly pressed clothing on hangers. Then she would have had 
to do it again on the way home. Not only would they be something extra to carry, but the 
cleaner's careful work would have been reduced to a mass of wrinkles. Sensitive as Kumiko 
was about such things, I couldn't imagine she would have done something so pointless. All 
she had to do was stop by on the way home from work. Or if she was going to be late, she 
could have asked me to pick them up. There was only one conceivable explanation: she had 
known she was not coming home. Blouse and skirt in hand, she had gone off somewhere. 
That way, she would have at least one change of clothing with her, and anything else she 
needed she could buy. She had her credit cards and her ATM card and her own bank account. 
She could go anywhere she wanted. 
And she was with someone- a man. There was no other reason for her to leave home, 
probably. 
This was serious. Kumiko had disappeared, leaving behind all her clothes and shoes. She 
had always enjoyed shopping to add to her wardrobe, to which she devoted considerable care 
and attention. For her to have abandoned it and left home with little more than the literal 
clothes on her back would have taken a major act of will. And yet without the slightest 
hesitation-it seemed to me-she had walked out of the house with nothing more in her hand 
than a blouse and skirt. No, her clothing was probably the last thing on her mind. 
Leaning back in my chair, half listening to the painfully sanitized background music, I 
imagined Kumiko boarding a crowded commuter train with her clothes on wire hangers in the 
cleaner's plastic bags. I recalled the color of the dress she was wearing, the fragrance of the 
cologne behind her ears, the smooth perfection of her back. I must have been exhausted. If I 
shut my eyes, I felt, I would float off somewhere else; I would end up in a wholly different place. 
