


The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle



35 



Just a Real Knife 

* 

The Thing That Had Been Prophesied 



Lighting my way along the floor and keeping my steps soundless, I moved toward the 
door. The bat was in my right hand. I was still walking when the knocks came again: two 
knocks, then two more. Harder this time, and more violent. I pressed myself against the 
side wall where I would be hid den by the door when it opened. There I waited, keeping 
my breath in check. 

When the sound of the knocks faded, deep silence descended on everything again, as 
if nothing had happened. I could feel the presence of someone on the other side of the 
door, though. This someone was standing there the way I was, keeping his breath in 
check and listening, trying to hear the sound of breathing or the beating of a heart, or to 
read the movement of a thought. I tried to keep my breath from agitating the sur rounding 
air. I am not here, I told myself. I am not here. I am not anywhere. 
The key turned in the lock. He made each movement with the utmost caution, 
stretching out the time it took to perform any one act so that the sounds involved would 
become isolated from each other, their meaning lost. The doorknob turned, and this was 
followed by the almost imperceptible sound of hinges rotating. The contractions of my 
heart began to speed up. I tried to quell the disturbance this caused, but without success. 
Someone came into the room, sending ripples through the air. I made a conscious 
effort to sharpen each of my five senses and caught the faint smell of a foreign body- a 
strange mixture of thick clothing, suppressed breathing, and overwrought nerves steeped 
in silence. Did he have the knife in his hand? I had to assume that he did. I remembered 
its vivid white gleam. Holding my breath, obliterating my presence, I tightened my grip 
on the bat. 
Once inside, the someone closed the door and locked it from within. Then he stood 
there, back to the door, waiting and watching. My hands on the bat were drenched with 
sweat. I would have liked to wipe my palms on my pants, but the slightest extra 
movement could have had fatal results. I brought to mind the sculpture that had stood in 
the garden of the abandoned Miyawaki house. In order to obliterate my presence here, I 
made myself one with that image of a bird. There, in the sun- drenched summer garden, I 
was the sculpture of a bird, frozen in space, glaring at the sky. 
The someone had brought his own flashlight. He switched it on, and its straight, 
narrow beam cut through the darkness. The light was not strong. It came from the same 
kind of penlight I was carrying. I waited for the beam to pass me as he walked into the 
room, but he made no effort to move. The light began to pick out items in the room, one 
after another-the flowers in the vase, the silver tray lying on the table (giving off its 
sensual gleam again), the sofa, the floor lamp.... It swung past my nose and came to rest 
on the floor a few inches beyond the tips of my shoes, licking every corner of the room 
like the tongue of a snake. I waited for what felt like an eternity. Fear and tension drilled 
into my consciousness with intense pain. 
No thinking. You are not allowed to think, I told myself. You are not allowed to use 
your imagination. Lieutenant Mamiya had said that in his letter. Imag ining things here 
can be fatal. 
Finally, the flashlight beam began to move forward slowly, very slowly. The man 
seemed to be heading for the inner room. I tightened my grip on the bat. It was then I 
noticed that the sweat of my hands had dried. If anything, my hands were now too dry. 
The man took one slow step forward, then stopped. Then one more step. He seemed 
to be checking his footing. He was closer to me than ever now. I took a breath and held it. 
Two more steps, and he would be where I wanted him. Two more steps, and I would be 
able to put an end to this walking nightmare. But then, without warning, the light 
disappeared. 
Total darkness had swallowed everything again. He had turned off his flashlight. I 
tried to make my mind work quickly in the dark, but it would not work at all. An 

unfamiliar chill ran through me. He had realized that I was there. 
Move, I told myself. Don't just stand there. I tried to dodge to the left, but my legs 
would not move. My feet were stuck to the floor, like the feet of the bird sculpture. I bent 
forward and barely managed to incline my stiffened upper body to the left. Just then, 
something slammed into my right shoulder, and something hard and cold as frozen rain 
stabbed me to the bone. 
The impact seemed to revive me, and the paralysis went out of my legs. I sprang to 
the left and crouched in the darkness, feeling for my op ponent. The blood was pounding 
through my body, every muscle and cell straining for oxygen. My right shoulder was 
going numb, but I had no pain. The pain would come later. I stayed absolutely still, and 
he did too. We faced each other in the darkness, holding our breaths. There was nothing 
to see, nothing to hear. 
Again, without warning, the knife came. It slashed past my face like an attacking bee, 
the sharp point just catching my right cheek where the mark was. I could feel the skin 
tearing. No, he could not see me, either. If he could, he would have finished me off long 
before. I swung the bat in the darkness, aiming in the direction from which the knife had 
come, but it just swished through the air, striking nothing. The swing had been a good 
one, though, and the crisp sound helped me to loosen up somewhat. We were still an even 
match. The knife had cut me twice, but not badly. Neither of us could see the other. And 
though he had a knife, I had my bat. 
Again, in our mutual blindness, breathing held in check, we felt each other out, 
waiting for some hint of movement. I could feel blood dripping down my face, but I was 
strangely free of fear. It's just a knife, I said to myself. It's just a cut. I waited. I waited 
for the knife to come my way again. I could wait forever. I drew my breath in and 
expelled it without a sound. Come on! I said to him in my mind. Move! I'm waiting for 
you to move. Stab me if you want to. I'm not afraid. 
Again the knife came. It slashed the collar of my sweater. I could feel the point 
moving past my throat, but it never touched my skin. I twisted and jumped to the side, 
and almost too impatient to straighten up, I swung the bat through space. It caught him 
somewhere around the collarbone. Not enough to bring him down or break any bones, but 
I knew I had hurt him. I could feel him recoil from the blow, and I heard a loud gasp. I 
took a short backswing and went for him again- in the same direction at a slightly higher 
angle, where I had heard the breath drawn in. 
It was a perfect swing. I caught him somewhere high on the neck. There was a 
sickening sound of cracking bone. A third swing hit home- the skull-and sent him flying. 
He let out a weird sound and slumped to the floor. He lay there making little gasps, but 
those soon stopped. I closed my eyes and, without thinking, aimed one final swing in the 
direction of the sound. I didn't want to do it, but I had no choice. I had to finish him off: 
not out of hatred or even out of fear, but as something I simply had to do. I heard 
something crack open in the darkness like a piece of fruit. Like a watermelon. I stood 
still, gripping the bat, holding it out in front of me. Then I realized I was trembling. All 
over. And there was no way I could stop it. I took one step back and pulled the flashlight 
from my pocket. 
"Don't!" cried a voice in the darkness. "Don't look at it!" Kumiko's voice was calling 
to me from the inner room, trying to stop me from look ing. But I had to look. I had to see 
it. I had to know what it was, this thing in the center of the darkness that I had just beaten 

to a pulp. Part of my mind understood what Kumiko was forbidding me to do. She was 
right: I shouldn't look at it. But I had the flashlight in my hand now, and that hand was 
moving on its own. 
"Please, I'm begging you to stop!" she screamed. "Don't look at it if you want to take 
me home again!" 
I clenched my teeth and quietly released the air I had locked in my lungs. Still the 
trembling would not subside. A sickening smell hung in the air- the smell of brains and 
violence and death. I had done this: I was the one who had made the air smell like this. I 
found the sofa and collapsed onto it. For a while, I fought against the nausea rising in my 
stomach, but the nausea won. I vomited everything in my stomach onto the carpet, and 
when that was gone I brought up stomach fluid, then air, and saliva. While vomiting, I 
dropped the bat on the floor. I could hear it rolling away in the darkness. 
Once the spasms of my stomach began to subside, I wanted to take out my 
handkerchief to wipe my mouth, but I could not move my hand. I couldn't get up from 
the sofa. "Let's go home," I said toward the darkness of the inner room. "This is all over 
now. Let's go." 
She didn't answer. 
There was no one in there anymore. I sank into the sofa and closed my eyes. 
I could feel the strength going out of me-from my fingers, my shoulders, my neck, my 
legs.... The pain of my wounds began to fade as well. My body was losing all sense of 
mass and substance. But this gave me no anxiety, no fear at all. Without protest, I gave 
myself up - surrendered my flesh-to some huge, warm thing that came naturally to enfold 
me. I realized then that I was passing through the wall of jelly. All I had to do was give 
myself up to the gentle flow. I'll never come back here again, I said to myself as I moved 
through the wall. Everything had come to an end. But where was Kum iko? Where did she 
go? I was supposed to bring her back from the room. That was the reason I killed the 
man. That was the reason I had to split his skull open like a watermelon. That was the 
reason I... But I couldn't think anymore. My mind was sucked into a deep pool of 
nothingness. 



When I came to, I was sitting in the darkness again. My back was against the wall, as 
always. I had returned to the bottom of the well. 
But it was not the usual well bottom. There was something new here, something 
unfamilia r. I tried to gather my faculties to grasp what was going on. What was so 
different? But my senses were still in a state of near-total paralysis. I had only a partial, 
fragmentary sense of my sur roundings. I felt as if, through some kind of error, I had been 
deposited in the wrong container. As time passed by, though, I began to realize what it 
was. 
Water. I was surrounded by water. 
The well was no longer dry. I was sitting in water up to my waist. I took several deep 
brea ths to calm myself. How could this be? The well was producing water - not cold water, 
though. If anything, it felt warm. I felt as if I were soaking in a heated pool. It then 
occurred to me to check my pocket. I wanted to know if the flashlight was still there. Had 
I brought it back with me from the other world? Was there any link between what had 

happened there and this reality? But my hand would not move. I couldn't even move my 
fingers. All strength had gone out of my arms and legs. It was impossible for me to stand. 
I began a coolheaded assessment of my situation. First of all, the water came up only 
to my waist, so I didn't have to worry about drowning. True, I was unable to move, but 
that was probably because I had used up every ounce of strength. Once enough time had 
gone by, my strength would probably come back. The knife wounds didn't seem very 
deep, and the paralysis at least saved me from having to suffer with pain. The blood 
seemed to have stopped flowing from my cheek. 
I leaned my head back again st the wall and told myself, It's OK, don't worry. 
Everything had probably ended. All I had to do now was give my body some rest here, 
then go back to my original world, the world above- ground, where the sunlight 
overflowed.... But why had this well started producing water all of a sudden? It had been 
dried up, dead, for such a long time, yet now it had come back to life. Could this have 
some connection with what I had accomplished there? Yes, it probably did. Something 
might have loosened whatever it was that had been obstructing the vein of water. 



Shortly after that, I encountered one ominous fact. At first I tried to resist accepting it 
as a fact. My mind came up with a list of possibilities that would enable me to do that. I 
tried to convince myself that it was a hallucination caused by the combination of darkness 
and fatigue. But in the end, I had to recognize its truth. However much I attempted to 
deceive myself, it would not go away. 
The water level was rising. 
The water had risen now from my w aist to the underside of my bent knees. It was 
happening slowly, but it was happening. I tried again to move my body. With a 
concentrated effort, I tried to squeeze out whatever strength I could manage, but it was 
useless. The most I could do was bend my neck a little. I looked overhead. The well lid 
was still solidly in place. I tried to look at the watch on my left wrist, without success. 
The water was coming in from an opening- and with what seemed like increasing 
speed. Where it had been barely seeping in at first, it was now almost gushing. I could 
hear it. Soon it was up to my chest. How deep was it going to get? 
Be careful of water, Mr. Honda had said to me. I had never paid any heed to his 
prophecy. True, I had never forgotten it, either (you don't forget anything as weird as 
that), but I had never taken it seriously. Mr. Honda had been nothing more than a 
harmless episode for Kumiko and me. I would repeat his words as a joke now and then 
when something came up: "Be careful of water." And we would laugh. We were young, 
and we had no need for prophecies. Just living was itself an act of prophecy. But Mr. 
Honda had been right. I almost wanted to laugh out loud. The water was rising, and I was 
in trouble. 
I thought about May Kasahara. I used my imaginatio n to picture her opening the well 
cover- with total reality and clarity. The image was so real and clear that I could have 
stepped right into it. I couldn't move my body, but my imagination still worked. What 
else could I do? 
"Hey, Mr. Wind -Up Bird," said May Kasahara. Her voice reverberated all up and 
down the well shaft. I hadn't realized that a well with water echoed more than one 

without water. "What are you doing down there? Thinking again?" 
"I'm not doing any one thing in particular," I said, facing upward. "I haven't got time 
to explain now, but I can't move my body, and the water is rising in here. This isn't a dry 
well anymore. I might drown." 
"Poor Mr. Wind -Up Bird!" said May Kasahara. "You emptied yourself out trying so 
hard to save Kumiko. And you probably did save her. Right? And in the process, you 
saved lots of people. But you couldn't save yourself. And nobody else could save you. 
You used up your strength and your fate saving others. All your seeds were planted 
somewhere else, and now your bag is empty. Have you ever heard of anything so unfair? 
I feel sympathy for you, Mr. Wind - Up Bird, from the bottom of my heart. It's true. But 
finally, it was a choice you made yourself. Do you know what I mean?" 
"I do," I said. 
I felt a dull throb in my right shoulder. It really happened, then, I told myself. The 
knife really cut me. It cut me as a real knife. 
"Are you afraid to die, Mr. Wind-Up Bird?" asked May Kasahara. 
"Sure I am," I said. I could hear my voice reverberating in the well. It was my voice, 
and at the same time it wasn't. "Sure I'm afraid when I think about dying down here in a 
dark well." 
"Goodbye, then, poor Mr. Wind- Up Bird," said May Kasahara. "Sorry, there's 
nothing I can do for you. I'm far, far away." 
"Goodbye, May Kasahara," I said. "You looked great in a bikini." 
May Kasahara's voice was very quiet as she said, "Goodbye, poor Mr. Wind- Up 
Bird." 
The well cover closed tightly again. The image faded. But nothing happened. The 
image was not linked to anything. I shouted toward the well mouth, "May Kasahara, 
where are you now when I need you?" 
The water was up to my throat. Now it was wrapped around my neck like a noose. In 
anticipation, I was beginning to find it difficult to breathe. My heart, now underwater, 
was working hard to tick off the time it had remaining. At this rate, I would have another 
five minutes or so before the water covered my mouth and nose and started filling my 
lungs. There was no way I could win. I had brought this well back to life, and I would die 
in its rebirth. It was not a bad way to die, I told myself. The world is full of much worse 
ways to die. 
I closed my eyes and tried to accept my impending death as calmly as I could. I 
struggled to overcome my fear. At least I was able to leave a few things behind. That was 
the one small bit of good news. I tried to smile, without much success. "I am afraid to die, 
though," I whispered to my self. These turned out to be my last words. They were not 
very impressive words, but it was too late to change them. The water was over my mouth 
now. Then it came to my nose. I stopped breathing. My lungs fought to suck in new air. 
But there was no more air. There was only lukewarm water. 
I was dying. Like all the other people who live in this world. 
¡¡
