Results from psychophysics suggest that it can take as little as 60 msec, or as long as 500 msec, for a stimulus to reach (or produce) experience, depending on the subject, type of stimulus, sensory modality, and the task the subject is attempting to perform. (For further discussion see Section 2 of the supplementary Document Some Relevant Empirical Findings (Psychology, Psychophysics, Neuroscience).)
in the case of very brief stimuli the resulting experience tends to last a good deal longer than the stimulus itself: e.g. a 1 msec flash of light can produce visual experiences lasting from 100msec to 400msec – a phenomenon known as ‘visible persistence’.  (For further discussion of visible persistence see Section 1 of the supplementary document Some Relevant Empirical Findings (Psychology, Psychophysics, Neuroscience).)
One issue to have been investigated is the manner in which very brief stimuli register in experience. It has been found that stimuli of around 1 msec need to be separated from one another by in interval of around 30 msec if they are to be perceived as a succession – a result which holds across sensory modalities. Stimuli which are separated by shorter intervals are not perceived as distinct – though this ‘coincidence threshold’ varies a good deal for the different sense modalities. For more on this see Section 3 of the supplementary document Some Relevant Empirical Findings (Psychology, Psychophysics, Neuroscience). A related topic has also been investigated: the minimal durations of perceptual experiences. Experiences produced by very brief stimuli are often longer, objectively speaking, than the stimuli themselves, but how brief (objectively speaking) can an experience be? Results from psychophysics vary a good deal, but answers range from 25 to 240 msec, depending on the task being undertaken and type of stimulus. See Section 4 of the supplementary document Some Relevant Empirical Findings (Psychology, Psychophysics, Neuroscience) for further discussion and references.
The Specious Present: Further Issues
