博尔赫斯1941年对《公民凯恩》的评论

博尔赫斯形容公民凯恩将传道书与卡夫卡结合起来，是一部“形而上的侦探故事”（metaphysical detective story）。是一座“没有中心的迷宫”，邀请我们自己将碎片拼起来


《公民凯恩》（在阿根廷被翻译为《公民》）至少有两个情节。第一个情节毫无意义，试图在蠢货中获取掌声：一个虚荣的亿万富翁收集雕像、花园、宫殿、游泳池、钻石、汽车、图书馆、男人和女人。就像一个早期的收藏家（ta的观察通常被归因于圣灵），他发现这些琳琅满目的杂糅是虚空的虚空：一切都是虚空。临终时，他渴望茫茫宇宙中的一样东西，那就是他孩童时玩耍的那个简陋的雪橇！

第二个情节要好得多。它将《传道书》与另一位虚无主义者，弗朗茨·卡夫卡的记忆联系在一起。一个形而上的侦探故事，它的主题（既是心理的又是寓言）是通过一个人所造就的、他说过的话、他毁掉的许多人来调查一个人内在的自我。相同的技术被约瑟夫·康拉德在《机遇》（1914年）中使用过，也在那部美妙的电影《权力与荣耀》中使用过：一连串不遵循时间顺序的杂乱场景的狂想曲。奥森·威尔斯无休止地向我们展示查尔斯·福斯特·凯恩的生活片段，邀请我们自己将它们拼起来以重建这个人。

影片中充斥着各种形式的多样性和不协调：第一个场景展示了凯恩积累的财富；在最后的场景中的一个中，一个可怜的女人，既奢华又痛苦，躺在像是博物馆一般的宫殿的地板上玩着一个巨大的拼图。最后我们意识到，这些片段没有受到任何秘密的统一的支配：备受厌恶的查尔斯·福斯特·凯恩只是一个幻影，一团混乱的表象。（一个 休谟、马赫以及我们自己的马塞多尼奥·费尔南德斯已经预见到的可能的推论：人人都不知道自己是谁，没有人是任何人。）在切斯特顿的一个故事——我想是《凯撒的头颅》——中，主人公认为没有中心的迷宫是最可怕的。这部电影正是那个迷宫。

我们都知道，一个派对、一个宫殿、一项伟大的事业、一个为作家和记者举办的午餐会、一种亲切而自发的同志情谊的氛围，在它们的实质上都是可怕的。《公民凯恩》是第一部带着对这个真理的认识来展示这些东西的电影。
总的来说，这部影片的制作与其庞大的主题相称。摄影具有引人注目的深度，有些镜头的最远处（像前拉斐尔派画作一样）和特写一样精确而详细。然而，我敢猜测，《公民凯恩》将会像某些格里菲斯或普多夫金的电影一样“经久不衰”——这些电影的历史价值是不可否认的，但也没有人想要再看一遍。它太庞大、太学究、太乏味了。它并不机趣，尽管它是天才——在这个词最深沉、最德国式的意义上——的杰作。

AN OVERWHELMING FILM

Citizen Kane (called The Citizen in Argentina) has at least two plots. The first, pointlessly banal, attempts to milk applause from dimwits: a vain millionaire collects statues, gardens, palaces, swimming pools, diamonds, cars, libraries, man and women. Like an earlier collector (whose observations are usually ascribed to the Holy Ghost), he discovers that this cornucopia of miscellany is a vanity of vanities: all is vanity. At the point of death, he yearns for one single thing in the universe, the humble sled he played with as a child!

The second plot is far superior. It links the Koheleth to the memory of another nihilist, Franz Kafka. A kind of metaphysical detective story, its subject (both psychological and allegorical) is the investigation of a man’s inner self, through the works he has wrought, the words he has spoken, the many lives he has ruined. The same technique was used by Joseph Conrad in Chance (1914) and in that beautiful film The Power and the Glory: a rhapsody of miscellaneous scenes without chronological order. Overwhelmingly, endlessly, Orson Welles shows fragments of the life of the man, Charles Foster Kane, and invites us to combine them and to reconstruct him.

Form of multiplicity and incongruity abound in the film: the first scenes record the treasures amassed by Kane; in one of the last, a poor woman, luxuriant and suffering, plays with an enormous jigsaw puzzle on the floor of a palace that is also a museum. At the end we realize that the fragments are not governed by any secret unity: the detested Charles Foster Kane is a simulacrum, a chaos of appearances. (A possible corollary, foreseen by David Hume, Ernst Mach, and our own Macedonio Fernandez: no man knows who he is, no man is anyone.) In a story by Chesterton — “The Head of Caesar,” I think — the hero observes that nothing is so frightening as a labyrinth with no center. This film is precisely that labyrinth.

We all know that a party, a palace, a great undertaking, a lunch for writers and journalists, an atmosphere of cordial and spontaneous camaraderie, are essentially horrendous. Citizen Kane is the first film to show such things with an awareness of this truth.

The production is, in general, worthy of its vast subject. The cinematography has a striking depth, and there are shots whose farthest planes (like Pre-Raphaelite paintings) are as precise and detailed as the close-ups. I venture to guess, nonetheless, that Citizen Kane will endure as a certain Griffith or Pudovkin films have “endured”—films whose historical value is undeniable but which no one cares to see again. It is too gigantic, pedantic, tedious. It is not intelligent, though it is the work of genius—in the most nocturnal and Germanic sense of that bad word.

Borges: Selected Non-Fictions, edited (and trans.) by Eliot Weinberger, Penguin, 2000