Describe a time when you saw a lot of plastic waste (e.g. in a park, on the beach etc.).

You should say:

Where you saw the plastic waste

When you saw the plastic waste

What you did

And explain how you felt about this experience

Introduction:
Unfortunately, plastic waste is becoming a serious threat and it is not uncommon to see plastic waste in our surroundings.

Here I am going to talk about my recent visit to a tourist attraction where I got disappointed to see plastic waste. Actually, there is a famous lake not far from my town, where people often go for picnic and enjoy boating.

Where and when you saw the plastic waste?
Last month, I too went there with my friends on weekend and we found this place extremely beautiful because of the natural scene. But, as we approached near the lake we felt extremely bad as there was loads of plastic waste in it.

Why there was a lot of plastic waste?
The fact is that, lots of people visit this place and often carry food in plastic containers and plastic bottles , but after having it they dump it carelessly. We saw plastic bags, wrappers, cans, plastic bottles and much more, which was not only ruining the beauty of the place but also affecting the marine life.

What you did do after you saw it?
In fact, we clicked few photographs by the lake and in the background there were piles of plastic waste. Being concerned about the environment, we approached the management. We requested them to keep the place clean and place dustbins for proper disposal of waste and if possible put a ban on plastic at site. In fact, we voluntarily cleaned the place with the cleaning staff which was enough to make others understand their responsibility as well.

Conclusion:
The management appreciated our efforts and promised us that they will do everything possible to keep the place neat and tidy in future.

1. Do you think we should use plastic products?
No, I don’t think that usage of plastic products should be encouraged. Every day in the newspaper we read about how plastics are destroying our planet, and there is not much we can do about it except prohibit their usage. Most of the plastic waste cannot be recycled and ends up in landfills or is dumped in the sea

2 Why do some people like to use plastic products?
I think there are two main reasons behind it. One is that plastic is more convenient as it doesn’t get damaged easily and keeps the goods safe and dry. Secondly, plastic is cheaper as compared to metal or other alternatives.

3. How can we reduce our use of plastic?
There are many simple everyday things that we can do to reduce our plastic consumption. For example, people can always carry a steel water bottle with them so that they don’t have to buy a plastic one. Another thing that people can do is to use jute or any other cloth bags for carrying goods from grocery stores.

4. What kinds of plastic waste are often seen in your country?
The most common plastic waste in my country would definitely be the plastic bags that people use for grocery shopping. The plastic water or soft drink bottles take the second spot.