Describe a time when someone asked for your opinion.

You should say:

Who asked for your opinion

Why he/she wanted to know your opinion

What opinion you gave to him/her

And explain how you felt when he/she asked for your opinion

Part 3

1 Why do some people dislike giving their opinions?

2 Are there any apps designed for collecting opinions about products and services?

3 Why do people like to express their opinions on the Internet nowadays?

4 What are the disadvantages of giving opinions online?

1. Why do some people dislike giving their opinions?
There are many reasons why some people do not like to share their perspectives/ideas about things. Sometimes they lack the confidence or the ability to explain their opinion in detail. They feel that they will be embarrassed if someone would counter their opinion and might not be able to defend their opinion. Another reason could be that some people are just shy in nature and like to keep things close to themselves.

2. Are there any apps designed for collecting opinions about products or services?
I am not aware of any app that only collects opinions about products but almost all the shopping apps have an option for the users to comment about the products they have purchased from their website. For example, many people write reviews on Amazon shopping app and give ratings for the products available there.

3. Why do people like to express their opinions on the Internet nowadays?
The primary reason is that people want their voice to be heard and Internet provides them a platform where they can express their views about anything and everything while being anonymous. Internet also provides them a sense of freedom to express their mind without having to worry about what others will think. Also, one can easily choose to engage or disengage in a conversation as per their convenience.

4. What are the disadvantages of sharing opinions on the Internet?
I think there are many disadvantages of this trend. Firstly, a lot many times people hurt each other’s sentiments by writing abusive content online. It is often seen in many chat forums that people are hurling abuses at each other over minor disagreements. Secondly, I think that online discussions are mostly not productive and waste people’s useful time.