Describe a time when you shared something with others.

You should say:

What you shared

Who you shared it with

Why you shared it

And explain how you felt about sharing it

Part 3

1 What are the consequences if children don’t know how to share?

2 How do people feel about sharing accommodation with others on campus?

3 How can parents and teachers teach young children to share?

1. Do you like to share?
Well, sharing is a good habit. I also like to share my things such as notes, clothes and electronic equipment with my friends and cousins.
OR
Yes, I love to share. In fact, I shared my meals with all my friends at school. I also used to share my notes with my friends and classmates. It was a habit.

2. What are the consequences if children don’t like to share?
it is very beneficial if a person shares things with others because, as a result, other people also help them. Children should have this kind of habit because it is beneficial for their future, but if children do not like to share, they might face many problems when they have grown up and work in a company. During work, employees have to do a lot of teamwork where they have to share many things, so if they are not ready to share something, they might face many problems.
OR
I think it might be difficult for children to make new friends if they are hesitant to share. When children grow up, they might face even bigger problems. For example, when they are working in a company and they are asked to share their responsibilities with others. If they fail to do so, they might even lose their jobs.

3. How do you feel about sharing accommodations with others on campus?
Sharing accommodation with others on campus not only allows us to meet new people and make new friends, but social networks booms also. I think privacy is also essential. I can share accommodation but do not share a room with others. I can share my room with others only when the person has the same mindset.
OR
I am open to sharing a house with others but I am not open to sharing my room. Also, in the case of house, it would depend upon the person I have to share the accommodation with. I would love to share accommodation with people with the same mindset.

4. How could parents and teachers teach young children to share?
It is a well-known fact that children always copy their elders or can say they follow their elder’s footsteps. So if their parents and teachers share things with others, then children will like to share their things, and there is no need to give them extra lessons.
OR
I think parents could do this by actually making children share responsibilities and things at home. For example, young children should be made to share a room. Teachers can give group assignments and encourage children to work together. When they work together and depend upon each other, they would automatically learn to share.

5. Do people in your country (or, you) prefer to share public transport or do they (you) prefer to use private transport?
It depends on various things such as financial status, time and destination. If people have enough time, they use public transport, which helps them save their money. On the other hand, some people are very introvert and like to travel alone and use private transport. Moreover, financially weak people share public transport.
OR
Well, it depends on the financial status of the people. Those who can afford, like to use their own private transport. Others prefer public transport. It also depends on the availability and comfort of public transport. Ever since the AC buses have improved their frequency to Chandigarh, I prefer to travel on those than going by my car.

6. Do many people in your country share their home with others or do they mostly live alone?
Nowadays most of the people move to cities from villages for their better future. Some buy their own house, but some live in the rented house but do not share their home with others. They share their house only with their relatives, friends but sometimes.
OR
Most people live in their own home or live in a rented house. But they don’t share their home with anybody. Students share apartments if they study away from their hometown.

7. Do you think there are any advantages to sharing your home with other (non-family) people?
As I said earlier some people who move from one place to another prefer to live in a rented house and there are lots of benefits if they share the home with other people. It can reduce their rent, electricity and internet bills and many additional charges.
OR
If you can get along well with other people, then there are advantages. But if there are conflicts, it can be a bad experience. Advantages are that the expenses can be shared. So, it becomes cheaper.

8. Would you ever share your food with someone else?
I had a lot of friends during school time, but I shared my food with my bench mate.
OR
Many times, I have shared my tiffin with my friends. Yes, I would readily share my food with others.