
Describe a time when you needed to search for some information.

You should say:

What information it was

When you searched for it

How you searched for it

And explain why you needed to search the information

I have to search for information a lot. I am currently working on my dissertation for my master’s degree so I seem to spend most of my life searching for information online, through university archives and academic journals and books! The most recent time was only yesterday. I needed to find a number of research papers to support a theory that I am writing about as part of my dissertation. Basically, I logged on to the university archives – they are all online now – and I spent several hours putting in different keywords and locating different research papers in peer-reviewed journals about the topic. I briefly skim-read them and selected the ones that were most relevant to what I want to write. It’s a fairly long and arduous process, but also quite interesting and inspiring. Actually, when you get used to it, it is enjoyable and quite easy, as you learn to “join the dots” between different scholar’s ideas and concepts and how they support their arguments. This is all part of the process of searching and analyzing information for master’s degree studies. I usually use the computer in the library or access the archives from my laptop at home. It’s something I enjoy doing and I’m happy I left plenty of time to do it, so I won’t have to panic, and I am sure I will finish my dissertation well before the deadline, then have time to polish and perfect it in a relaxed manner.
1. How can people search for information now?
I believe that smartphones are the best option for looking up information anywhere and at any time. They just have to type a few words in the google search engine and within milliseconds they can get hundreds of documents and videos about the information they are looking for.

2. What information can people get from television?
Although television is mainly considered an entertainment unit or sometimes also called an idiot box, I believe that if people watch the right channels they can learn a lot about the world and increase their general knowledge by watching television.

3. Do you think libraries are still important in the digital age?
Yes, I feel that libraries still have an important role to play in our society. Apart from access to thousands of great books at the same time, libraries also provide a studious and focused environment for reading which is hard to replicate elsewhere.

4. Does the development of the Internet have any impact on some disadvantaged people?
Yes, technologies such as Internet have definitely helped the disadvantaged, especially those from weaker economic backgrounds. It has allowed them to learn new things for free and also created opportunities for them to earn more money by being able to reach more customers.
For example, a small time taxi driver who could get only a few customers from a particular location/ stand only can now ferry more customers in a day, and that too from any location because of mobility apps like uber.