Describe a problem you had while shopping online or in a store.

You should say:

When it happened

What you bought

What problems you had while shopping online

And explain how you felt about it

I’ve had many experiences with online shopping, but the one I recall the most clearly is the time that I bought an item and had such trouble getting a refund from the seller. I can’t remember the name of the store now, but anyway, I bought a thick coat for winter – it was quite expensive actually – and when it arrived, it had a rip in the back and the zip was faulty. I contacted the company through the online chat and they said they were happy to refund it, and I should just send it back. I arranged with a delivery service to send the package back and it went smoothly. They confirmed they had received it okay. Everything seemed to be fine. Then there was total silence for weeks…. Yes, weeks! I contacted the seller, nothing. I checked my bank account and shopping platform order and returns messages, nothing. I messaged them countless times, and they simply did not reply. I had no idea what they were playing at but I was pretty angry. I contacted the online platform and they said they would put in a case against the seller. I didn’t really want it to get to this stage because that kind of process takes a long time sometimes, and is quite annoying. Anyway, they put in a case against the seller, and after all sorts of calls, steps, hurdles and disputes, I eventually got my refund. To be perfectly honest it kind of put me off online buying, at least online clothes buying. I like to just go to shops, try an item on, buy it or not buy and that’s that. That, to be honest, is the simpler and more enjoyable way of shopping. I think this whole online shopping thing is massively overrated to be honest.

Part 3

1 What kind of service do you think is good?
I think that creating a good customer experience depends on multiple factors. The companies should ensure that the staff providing the service should be prompt, attentive, and most importantly be very patient and polite with the client.

2. What are the differences between shopping online and in-store?
There are numerous differences between online shopping versus shopping from brick and mortar stores. First of all, online shopping is more convenient as it saves a lot of time and energy. Also, it can be done 24X7, whereas, the stores are generally open for 10-12 hours only. The only benefit of retail stores is that an individual can make a better judgement of the look and feel of the product which is not possible online.

3. What problems do customers often have while shopping?
Generally, the customers are not able to easily find products/goods that match their needs or taste. For example, sometimes if a person likes a particular piece of clothing, he/she might not be able to find the right size for it. Other than that sometimes they might have to deal with rude and impolite staff.

4. What do you think customers should do when there are problems with products bought online? 
The customers should immediately lodge a complaint with the website from which they have bought the product. Also, they should go through the refund and return policy for the product and then take the necessary action.