Describe a time when you were late for an important event.

You should say:

When it happened

Where it happened

What made you be late for that event

And explain how you felt about this experience

The time I remember the clearest when I was late for an important event was when I almost missed an exam. Can you believe it? Yes, I almost missed a really important examination. I had stayed up most of the night studying, because I’d left it till the last minute, which is a really bad habit, I know. I had been really stressed out about it, and just kept putting it off... you know, procrastinating a lot, and eventually it was just late, and I sat up most of the night trying to cram all this information into my head. Anyway, eventually, about 4am, I fell asleep through sheer exhaustion, and I woke up about 830am, and realized that I had slept through my alarm clock, and it was the time for the exam to start! I got dressed super-quickly and rushed out of the room, down to the bus stop, caught the bus and arrived on campus at least 20 minutes late for the start of the exam. I got to the exam hall and I pleaded with the invigilator on the door to let me in – which she actually did – although you are not meant to be allowed into the exam hall if you’re late. I sat down, feeling completely stupid, and they gave me the exam papers and I started – having already missed half an hour of the exam! I felt really embarrassed but also even more stressed than I had been before! I felt really terrible. The strange thing is, I actually found the exam quite easy – it was not that hard at all, and I ended up getting a really good grade in it! Can you believe it? I was so lucky that they asked all the questions I already felt confident about answering and knew the answers to. So, that was a huge relief. However, I did not take this experience for granted and vowed to be more intelligent in future about how I manage my time and my studies. So, I’d say I learned to from the experience, at least.