Describe a piece of good news you heard from others.

You should say:

What it was?
When you received this news?
How you received this news?
Why you feel it was a good news?

Introduction:

In our day-to-day life, we hear a lot of news from others.
Some are good and some are not so good.
What it was?

Here I would like to talk about a news, which I heard from my neighbours.
The news was that an international level sports stadium is going to open in my home town.
About six months ago, as I was walking in a park near my home, I saw some neighbours standing in a group and discussing something.
When you received this news? and How you received this news?

I joined them and came to know that they were talking about this stadium.
As it is the sports facilities in my hometown are not so good and the young people do not have a place to develop their sporting talent.
Many young people who are serious to do sports as a career has joined academies in Jalandhar and Phillaur.
If there will be such facilities locally, then many more youngsters would be encouraged to do sports regularly.
Why you feel it was good news?

I feel it is good news because we are leading sedentary lives.
There is hardly any physical activity.
Obesity has become a common problem among people, especially young children.
The youth is going towards drugs and other such vices.
An NGO, run by some NRIs of my home town has donated two acres of land for this project.
Our local MLA has got the approval for this and is being very proactive in fetching funds for this project.
This stadium would have underground car parking to accommodate 500 cars.
The construction work has already started.
The stadium would have a seating capacity of 5000.
It would have covered seating areas also.
There would be changing rooms for the sportsmen and washrooms for the public.
There would be a drinking water facility at regular intervals.
There would also be surveillance cameras all over so that no untoward incident happens.
If people know they are being watched, then they refrain from doing anti-social things such as petty crimes.
There would be lights run by solar energy.
Conclusion:

The stadium would be so well lit even at night that sports could be played there 24/7.