”If you pretend to be good, the world takes you very seriously. “
” It is absurd to divide people into good and bad.  People are either charming or tedious. “ 
"we are all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars."
"I can resist everything but temptation."
"Because I think that life is far too important a thing ever to talk seriously about it." (Lord Darlington)

"gossip is charming!  History is merely gossip." 
"whenever people agree with me, I always feel I must be wrong." 
"Experience is the name Tuppy gives to his mistakes. "
"Now, my dear Tuppy, don’t be led astray into the paths of virtue.  Reformed, you would be perfectly tedious.  That is the worst of women.  They always want one to be good.  And if we are good, when they meet us, they don’t love us at all.  They like to find us quite irretrievably bad, and to leave us quite unattractively good."  (Cecil Graham)

Lord Augustus.  My dear boy, when I was your age—
Cecil Graham.  But you never were, Tuppy, and you never will be.

"I congratulate you, my dear fellow.  In this world there are only two tragedies.  One is not getting what one wants, and the other is getting it." (Dumby)

Lord Augustus.  [Looking round.]  Time to educate yourself, I suppose.
Dumby.  No, time to forget all I have learned.  That is much more important, dear Tuppy.  [Lord Augustus moves uneasily in his chair.]

Lord Darlington.  What cynics you fellows are!
Cecil Graham.  What is a cynic?  [Sitting on the back of the sofa.]
Lord Darlington.  A man who knows the price of everything and the value of nothing.
Cecil Graham.  And a sentimentalist, my dear Darlington, is a man who sees an absurd value in everything, and doesn’t know the market price of any single thing.

Dumby.  It’s no use talking to Tuppy.  You might just as well talk to a brick wall.
Cecil Graham.  But I like talking to a brick wall—it’s the only thing in the world that never contradicts me!  Tuppy!

"Yes; I am going to live abroad again.  The English climate doesn’t suit me.  My—heart is affected here, and that I don’t like.  I prefer living in the south.  London is too full of fogs and—and serious people, Lord Windermere.  Whether the fogs produce the serious people or whether the serious people produce the fogs, I don’t know, but the whole thing rather gets on my nerves, and so I’m leaving this afternoon by the Club Train."
"I thought I had no heart.  I find I have, and a heart doesn’t suit me." (Mrs. Erlynne.)