
想象一对镜子，一束光线在镜子之间跳动——光线在镜子之间的每一次往返都算作时钟的一个“刻度”。为了让这个装置像时钟一样计时，每个“滴答”的时间间隔必须相同。除非镜子在时空中移动时由一根刚性杆连接，否则这一条件就会被违反。没有刚性杆，狭义相对论预言，作用在两面镜子上的力所导致的速度变化会延长受力后的时间间隔，从而破坏系统作为时钟准确测量整个旅程时间的能力。换句话说，从原始参照系的角度来看（在施加力之前），两面镜子之间的空间距离会收缩，从而保持光线所经过的时间间隔不变。这就是狭义相对论中光速恒定的意义，尽管没有独立于任何参照系的绝对的空间或时间来客观地测量速度。
imagining a pair of mirrors, between which a ray of light bounces— each round trip of the light between the mirrors counting as a “tick” of the clock. In order for the mechanism to count as a clock, the intervals measured by each tick must be the same. As Maudlin explains, this condition will be violated unless, as Einstein proposed, the mirrors are connected by a rigid rod as they move through space- time. Without it, special relativity predicts that changes in velocity resulting from a force acting on the two mirrors would lengthen the intervals after the force is applied, destroying the system’s ability to function as a clock accurately measur ing time for the journey as a whole. According to relativity theory, the rigid rod connecting the mirrors prevents this by physically contracting as the force is applied, pulling the mirrors closer together in just the amount needed to keep the intervals traveled by the light back and forth between the mirrors the same.19 In other words, the spatial distance between the two mirrors, as mea sured from the perspective of the original reference frame (before the force was applied), contracts in a way that preserves the length of the intervals traveled by the light. This is the sense in which the speed of light is constant in special relativity, even though there is no absolute space or time to objectively measure speed independent of any frame of reference. 
Soames 237

相对论所预言的光速恒定这一事实是可以通过经验来检验的。一个光源从一对快速旋转的圆盘（一个在另一个后面，与另一个有一定距离）后方的空间位置 p 发射出来，这对圆盘通过一根快速旋转的杆连接在一起。每个圆盘上都有一个小缝，光线可以通过。光源照射在后圆盘上，导致一些光在旋转时穿过圆盘的狭缝。如果穿过的光线到达旋转的第二个圆盘上的狭缝所占据的空间，光线就会穿过狭缝，照亮仪器后面的屏幕；反之，光线就会被第二个圆盘挡住。通过调整圆盘的速度以及狭缝的位置和角度，可以使来自 p 的光始终可以通过。相对论预言，无论在 p 处发射光线的光源处于静止状态，还是朝向或远离仪器运动，这种状态都将保持不变。这一点已经得到验证。
the fact that the speed of light is constant in the way predicted by relativity theory can be tested empirically. One such test involves a light a light source emitted from a spatial location p in line behind a pair of rapidly spinning discs (one behind and at some dis tance from the other) connected by a rapidly spinning rod. Each disc has a small slit in it through which light might pass. The light source shines on the rear disc, resulting in some light passing through its slit as it spins. If the light passing through reaches the space occupied by the slit in the rotating second disc, the light will pass through it and illuminate the screen behind the apparatus; other wise it will be blocked by the second disc. By adjusting the speed of the discs, as well as the placement and the angle of the slits, it is pos si ble to put the system into a state in which the light from p always gets through. Relativity theory predicts that this will remain true whether the source emitting light at p is at rest, or is moving toward or away from the apparatus. This has been verified. 237-8