“但是，Yablo的这样一种策略有一个重要问题。首先，为了将“对任何自然数m，m+3=3+m”这样的算术真理翻译成逻辑真理，用Yablo的话说，也就是为了要找出这样一个算术命题的真正内容，我们必须先将它表达成一个无穷长的句子，即“0+3=3+0，而且1+3=3+1，而且2+3=3+2，…”然后再将其中的每一个简单算术等式表达成像上面那个例子那样的逻辑真理。结果也是一个无穷长的句子。如果我们要用类似的策略，将数学分析中的真理翻译成逻辑真理，我们将要得到由不可数个符号组成的句子，因为有不可数个实数。Yablo断言，这样无穷长的句子还是表达一个逻辑真理。这当然要让多数哲学家摇头。更重要的是，这没有解答我们关于数学真理性的困惑。这个困惑是，我们的由有限个神经元组成的大脑，究竟是如何可能认识那些无穷的数学对象的。我们的大脑里显然没有这样无穷长的句子，或某种意义上无穷长的思想，更不用说由不可数个符号组成的句子。”《什么是数学真理》
用无穷逻辑
无穷逻辑的“表达”仍是有穷的（T chow）
就像计算机“储存”无理数一样
类比similarities
就好像公理模式

mathematics is more like a fable, rather than a story, like oliver twist. "Yet more imporant is the matter of application, which in literature typically takes the form of a 'message'. The fable typically though not invariably has a 'moral'" For other words, it has a normative (要求). ...
BURGESS, J. P. (2004). Mathematics and Bleak House. Philosophia Mathematica, 12(1), 18–36. p. 22 doi:10.1093/philmat/12.1.18 
However, a question could always be asked: why is mathematics so useful? If it is just a consistent (or even not consistent) story, “真空中的无摩擦转动”, then what amounts to its applicability to the reality? Well, as far as I am concerned, one immediate reply comes as follows:
If mathematics is the product of the brain, there are so many kinds of mathematical objects, and it is not strange that some be useful to our understanding to the world. For example, group is very useful in treating symmetric things, but may not be good for other structures. So the answer is simply that it is a brute fact that some mathematical concepts could be applied to some parts of our world.
Another, maybe more sophiscated version of this answer is that, just as we may put mythological interpretation onto the world (or at least phenonmena of the world), we could use mathematical interpreatation to interpret the world. Mathematics is only an intepretation.  However, it is the hard core of our web of belief, which is so robust that we so strongly believe in its truthness. For example, for 2*5=10, consider the following scenary: 我们先看到有5对桌子，每对有两张。然后我们再一个个去数，结果发现只有9张。我们可能会想我们是数错了，或者一开始就没有5对桌子/我们一开始假设有5对桌子就是错的; Or we would think that something has been removed through the process. The only case we could not believe is that 2*5=10 is false, that 2*5=\10.