
Husserl on Hilbert-Frege dispute
“ce".We know that this assertion, this exchange of letters, was known to Husserl, because Husserl had made excerpts from the correspondence, which entail just this part of the dispute.But not only this. Husserl also added the remark: "Frege does not understand the sense (Sinn) of Hilbert's 'axiomatic' foundation of geometry.” 
husserl and hilbert on completeness

Kant's philosophy of mathematics
Philosophy confines itself to universal concepts; mathematics can achieve nothing by concepts alone but hastens at once to intuition, in which it considers the concept in concre to, though not empirically, but only in an intuition which it presents a priori, that is, which it has constructed, and in which whatever follows from the universal conditions of the construction must be universally valid of the object thus constructed.
—(Kant, Critique of Pure Reason A716/B744)
引自第129页

For Kant, the concept of the number 7 is available to the Understanding without the aid of Sensibility and, hence, without intuitions. But its schematization—the provision of a reference for any concept-expression associated with it—does require intuition.
引自第141页
The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mathematics and LogicShapiro, Stewart 编Oxford University Press2007

康德在谈及数学式的崇高（mathematical sublime），即理性以优于想象力，感官理解所需的自然能力，包括对经验所给事物的大小的理解，的形式优于自然，时，明确提到，我们能够通过理性将无限作为一个整体来思考，这一事实 "表明了一种超越每一个感官标准的心灵能力"（§26，254）

Russell's view that mathematics and logic are sythetic
Just because there is in our imagination a striving to advance to the infinite, while in our reason there lies a claim to absolute totality, as to a real idea, the very inadequacy of our faculty for estimating the magnitude of the things in the sensible world [viz., imagination] awakens the feeling of a supersensible faculty in us. (§25, 250)

"And it is not easily squared with the fact that during his philosophically most productive period, Russell used the terminology only to express his agreement with Kant that mathematics is synthetic, while holding that, contrary to Kant, logic is as synthetic as mathematics.

······

"2 Principles, p. 457. For a discussion of Russell and Kant, see Coffa [1981]."(Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mathematics and Logic, p130)

Russell, B. [1903]: The principles of mathematics, London: Allen and Unwin

Coffa, A. [1981]: ‘‘Russell and Kant,’’ Synthese , 46, pp. 246–264.

毕达哥拉斯万物皆数
提到毕达哥拉斯派的信条“万物皆数”，不少人将之称之为数学神秘主义。之所以有此一说，或许是因为现代人直觉上只有三种方式来理解数：独立于现实的抽象实体（柏拉图），某种先天知识（康德）或可感物的理想化抽象（密尔）。因而“数构成可感物”这种说法是无法字面上理解的，只能理解为某种隐喻或者神秘主义。

但是至少在亚里士多德的年代，情况并非如此。事实上，亚里士多德在《形而上学​》中专门用了两章的篇幅来论述数学哲学并反驳毕达哥拉斯派。

毕达哥拉斯派的观点有一个在当时十分有说服力的论证：数是永恒不变的实体，可感物是不断变动且可消灭的实体，而可消灭的实体的本原只能是不可消灭的实体（否则会导致无穷后退）。亚里士多德的论证思路是，证明数不是实体（在亚氏的十范畴中，数是不同于实体的范畴）。

数如果是实体，那要么是可感物，要么是理念，要么是可感物与理念的居间者（柏拉图的看法）。首先数显然不是可感物；其次，理念作为静止不动的存在，对理念进行运算是无法理解的（比如说2的理念和自身“相加”，“得到”了4的理念，这是难以理解的），因此数不是理念；最后，同种实体的属差最大者称为对立者，只有对立者之间才有居间者，但可感物和理念并不是由属差所区分的，因此也不存在可感物和理念的居间者（就像真和假之间没有居间者），因此数不是实体，因而也不可能构成可感物。

或许是亚里士多德的论证以及他巨大的权威，我们如今已经无法像毕达哥拉斯派那样理解和构想“万物皆数”的含义。不过亚氏的理解也未必完全准确，有数学史家如莫里斯·克莱因就提出，毕达哥拉斯派的“数”最早可能指的是某种表示数的点阵，因而在本体论层面更接近原子论者所构想的某种几何微粒。

