
Computational Complexity

	
dr. R. de de Haan (co-ordinator)

Objectives
compare different models of resource-bounded computation
analyze the running time of an algorithm in terms of the input size
formulate how a computational task can be modeled as a decision problem
argue why the approach of distinguishing different complexity classes is useful
critize the framework of worst-case asymptotic complexity analysis
explain the concepts of nondeterminism, alternation, and randomized algorithms
produce a proof of NP-completeness for variants of known NP-complete problems
predict what the implications are if certain complexity classes coincide
classify the location of a decision problem in the landscape of computational complexity
explain how oracles can be used to show the limits of relativizing proofs, and what constraints this places on any proof for P != NP
explain how various complexity-theoretic assumptions (e.g., P != NP, Exponential Time Hypothesis) can be used to rule out efficient algorithms for computational problems
Contents
Computational complexity theory deals with the fundamental question of how many resources (such as time, memory, communication, randomness, etc.) are needed to perform a computational task. A fundamental open problem in the area is the well-known P versus NP problem, one of the Clay Millennium problems. In this course we will treat the basics of complexity theory, including: NP-completeness, diagonalization, non-deterministic computation, alternation, Boolean circuits, randomized computation, approximation algorithms, subexponential-time complexity.

Recommended prior knowledge
Basic math and computer science, and basic knowledge of propositional logic.

Registration
More information about procedures and registration periods can be found at https://student.uva.nl/en/topics/course-registration

Teaching method and contact hours
Lecture
Self-study
Study materials
Literature:
S. Arora and B. Barak. Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Assessment
The final grade will be based on the results of homework assignments and a final exam.

Remarks
A Canvas site will be available.