
Semantics and Philosophy
	
dr. M.D. Aloni (co-ordinator)

Objectives
Upon successful completion of this course you will have

Received an in depth introduction in a topic at the interface of semantics and philosophy
Had the opportunity to train your reading skills and learnt how to present ideas in these two areas, and practiced in the writing of a small paper/essay.
Contents
Formal semantics and philosophy of language both study meaning and use of natural language expressions, but often from different perspectives. In the seminar we will focus on topics that have been addressed both in the philosophical and semantic literature and discuss papers from both traditions. The papers will be handed out to you and you will then have to read them, understand them and present them to the seminar. Possible topics include: reference, indexicals, (epistemic) modals, negation, plurals, conditionals, numerals, free choice, propositional attitudes, imperatives, questions, speech act theory, situation semantics/truthmaker semantics, dynamic semantics.

 

This course is part of the following thematic cluster(s):

Language, Logic, Mind and Metaphysics

The specialist topics/approaches in the course have relevance/impact for indicated fields:

Formal Logic and Semantics, Philosophy of Language

Recommended prior knowledge
The seminar is aimed at students who plan to specialise in philosophy of language and/or formal semantics. Some background in these areas is therefore expected. If you have a different background you are welcome to join, but you need to be aware of these expectations.

Registration
Students from Philosophy masters' programmes (--> Filosofie / --> Philosophy, --> Philosophy of the Humanities and the Social Sciences (Master's in Philosophy) and --> Research master's in Philosophy (research)) and Master's in Logic receive priority when registering for this course.
Information about course registration can be found here.
 

Teaching method and contact hours
1 x 3 hours seminar per week

Study materials
The literature list will be announced during an introductory meeting, which will take place in Period 3. Attendance is compulsory for this first introductory meeting. Students who fail to attend will lose their place in the course.

Assessment
Organization of a session
Class presentation
Participation in discussions
Final paper