Describe a disagreement you had with someone.

You should say:

Who you had the disagreement with

What the disagreement was

What happened

And explain how you felt about it

I vividly remember, about six months ago, when I was in 12th grade and burning the midnight oil to clear my exams with good marks. At that time, a new Bollywood movie was released. So my friend planned to watch that movie in the theatre.

Why did you have the disagreement ?
However, I disagreed with him because final exams were around the corner. So, I didn’t want to miss a class in any case. With my decision, my friend was furious on me because he is a cinephile person, and exams were a bone of contention among us.

Part 3

1 What do you do if you disagree with someone?

2 How do we stop anargument from escalating into a fight?

3 What disagreements do parents and children usually have?
Curfew. Curfew is a classic topic for parents and teenagers to argue about. ...
Cell Phone Use. Historically speaking, cell phones are a new technology, so this is a fairly new source of conflict. ...
Noise. ...
Boyfriend/Girlfriend. ...
Church/Religion. ...
Grades. ...
Fairness. ...
Personal Appearance.

1. If there is a disagreement, what do you do?
It really depends upon the issue. If it is a minor issue, I don’t let it escalate and just tell the person, I disagree with and move on. However, if it’s something important, I ask my parents and friends for advice.

2. How can we disagreements from escalating into a fight?
I think we just need to be calm and rational. I think the best way to de-escalate situations is to give them time. We always make wrong decisions when we don’t give issues time. I also try to involve a neutral person and ask them for advice.

3. Who do you think should teach children to respect- teachers or parents?
I think both parents and teachers have the responsibility of teaching children. However, I think such things are not taught but rather learnt by observing others. Children pick up a lot of things by watching their parents and so it is absolutely important that parents behave appropriately in front of them.

4. What do you do when you have a disagreement with your parents?
Well, in this case, I am normally forced to accept their viewpoint. I know my parents have my best interests at heart, so I don’t mind it. However, sometimes when I feel strongly about something I do try to resist. Sometimes, they do let me prevail.

