She was in her early 30s, and had a wonderful way of making learning fun.

Describe a time when you enjoyed an impressive English lesson.

You should say:

When and where you had the lesson

Who gave you the lesson

What the lesson was about

And explain why you enjoyed the lesson

Part 3

1 Is it interesting to be a foreign language teacher?

2 What makes a good foreign language teacher?

3 Do you think language learning is important?

4 Do you think grammar is important when learning foreign language?

1. What are the benefits of learning a foreign language?
There are many benefits of learning a foreign language. Firstly, it helps students academically, as the skills they learn in one language like comprehension and finding out the main theme of a paragraph can also be applied to their language. Secondly, it opens up more opportunities in the future. For example, it can help students pursue higher education in a foreign country. Similarly, a foreign language can help people secure a job in a company, which deals with foreign clients.

2. What are the benefits of being a foreign language teacher?
The main benefit of teaching another language is that the person can enhance their knowledge of the language. I think people learn much more about the language when they teach than when they study it.
Secondly, foreign languages also tend to get paid better and they might also get opportunities to travel abroad. Finally, I feel the language classes have the most diversity in terms of age. I have seen people as old as seventy learning French and German. So, it never gets boring teaching a foreign language as people get to meet different people.

3. Will computers replace foreign language teachers in the future?
I think computers are certainly beneficial in helping students learn a foreign language. However, I do not think computers can replace language teachers completely. Computers can help students improve their grammar and pronunciation but they cannot help students develop or express ideas. Moreover, there are cultural aspects to a language, which can be only taught by a teacher in my opinion.

4. Is grammar the most difficult part about learning a foreign language?
No, I don’t think grammar is the most difficult part as there are certain rules of grammar. I think it is logical and so it can be learnt with practice. However, pronunciation can be very tricky as I find there are no fixed rules to it.

5. Do you think grammar is important in language learning?
Yes, I think grammar is really important in language learning. If the grammar is wrong, the sentence can give out a completely different meaning and it can lead to misunderstandings and embarrassment.
For example, I taught, and I was taught mean completely different things, just the presence of was in the middle – changes the meaning completely.