
Describe a time when you made a decision to wait for something

You should say:

When it happened

What you waited for

Why you made the decision

And explain how you felt about the decision

film; with a friend of mine; delay; do I ... on my own? Do I invite another friend to join me? Or do I exercise a bit of personal patience and wait?; We had planned booked tickets; A couple of weeks before the holiday she announced that her grandmother had insisted that the family get together for Spring Festival and had convinced her not to miss it. She had basically been persuaded to cancel her trip with me; Whilst I can understand this, I was obviously upset 

1. What do people in your country often do while waiting?
Nowadays most people spend time scrolling through social media applications on their phones while they are waiting for something. People like to be aware of the new trends and they also find such applications to be entertaining.

2. Why do some people like a slow-paced life?
I think some people just like to take things slow because they have a more relaxed and focused approach towards life. Unlike others they don’t want to be in a rat race of earning more and more money, instead, they prefer to live in the moment and discover life as it is.

3. Is being patient good for people? Why?
Yes, patience is a virtue that every person should have these days. Lot many times we see people losing patience on simple matters and becoming angry which does not bring good for anyone. Being patient helps people stay calm in difficult situations and stay in control of their emotions, whereas impatient ones can easily lose emotional control and get into arguments

4. Are people less patient now than people in the past? Why?
Today’s generation is definitely less patient as compared to people in the old times. With technological advancements, they have become accustomed to getting things instantly. For example, people can now book flight tickets, order food, or transfer money with just the click of a button. So, when they have to wait for something that would take more time than usual, it makes them really impatient.