in the centre of France on the River Seine

a city you would recommend as a nice place to live in (not your hometown).
You should say:

What it is

Where it is

What you know about this place

And explain why you recommend it as a nice place to live

1. Where do people like to live in your country?
Majority of India’s population still continues to live in rural areas and small towns. However, this trend is changing and a lot of young people are now migrating to the big cities for better employment opportunities and to gain access to advanced infrastructure facilities like hospitals, universities, shopping malls, etc

2. Why do many people move to the city?
As I mentioned earlier people are moving to cities because they feel that they can get a better quality of life in the cities as they offer a better living standard. The luxurious lifestyle, modern amenities, and entertainment options in cities is what woos the youngsters towards them.

3. What are the advantages of living close to the workplace?
The biggest advantage of living close to the workplace is the reduced time and expenditure on commute. People get to spend more quality time with their family members and avoid the stress of being struck in long traffic jams. It is also good for the environment as people can walk or cycle to their workplace instead of commuting by cars.

4. What kinds of places do older people prefer to live in?
Most of the old folks prefer to live in societies that are serene and peaceful. They don’t prefer living in noisy areas as it disturbs their sleep a lot. Also, they prefer to buy a house near a park or garden so that they can easily go for morning or evening walks.

Describe a place/ country in which you would like to live/ work for a short period of time

You should say:

Where you would like to live/work?
What you want to do there?
When would you like to go there?
Why you want to live there

1. What kinds of jobs are easy to get in a foreign country?
My cousin who lives in Canada tells me that there are many jobs that are easy to get for students studying there. The most common ones are the jobs in restaurants or fast food outlets like McDonald’s, Burger King, Subway, and those in the college campus itself, like jobs in the library, etc.

2. Should young adults work abroad?
Yes, young adults should work abroad because of several reasons like, taking care of their overhead expenses, taking the financial burden off their parents’ shoulders, they become more independent and responsible and they gain experience about the work culture, which would help them in their future. It is also a good way to learn about the culture of that country and to meet new people and make friends.

3. If they don’t work abroad, would it be helpful for them to travel in a foreign country?
Yes, travelling is definitely helpful. They would come to know about the culture, meet new people, see new places, and make new connections. However, if they don’t work, they may not be able to afford travelling.

4. Do Indian parents encourage their children to work abroad?
Yes, Indian parents encourage their children to work abroad. They prepare their children well before they travel abroad, about the situations and hardships they may have to face and the importance of working while studying there, so that they can cover their expenses and also gain work experience.

5. If you had an opportunity to live abroad, which country would you like to settle down in?
If I have an opportunity to live abroad, I would like to settle in a developed country, like Canada, Australia, the USA, etc. I have heard form my friends and relatives living abroad that life there is very comfortable, with better facilities and infrastructure. They also tell me that the standard living is very high there, as compared to India. Also, there are a lot of job opportunities available there.

6. Would you like to live in a developed city with a high salary but with polluted air?
If I am in dire need of money for my family, I would go for it, but otherwise I would avoid it. I would use a face mask to filter the polluted air. I would also avoid taking my family there with me.

7. Would you like to live alone or share a room with others?
This would also depend on my financial condition. If sharing a room would save me money, I would share, otherwise, living alone would give me more privacy and independence.

8. What are the advantages and disadvantages of living alone?
Disadvantages are that it would be costly and I would have to do all my household chores myself, but the advantages are that I would have more privacy and I can live according to my wish.