Describe a difficult thing you did and succeeded.

You should say:

What it was

How you overcame the difficulties

Whether you got help

And explain how you felt after you succeeded

Part 3

1 What kinds of things do children feel very hard to do?

2 How can parents encourage children to do something difficult?

3 What kinds of jobs can help people become confident?4 What’s

your definition of success?

1. What kinds of jobs require people to be confident?
I think all jobs require a certain degree of confidence but the ones which involve dealing with customers require a lot more confidence. For example, if a salesperson is not confident enough then he will not be able to convince the customers about the product he/she is trying to sell.

2. On what occasions should children be encouraged? How?
I think children should be encouraged in those situations where they feel hesitant in doing something that is good for them. But also, the encouragement should be done to a certain limit, they should not feel like something is being forced upon them. For example, we can encourage children to learn something creative such as painting if they show interest in it. And to encourage them more, parents can take them to a museum so they can develop their interest further.

3. How do you help children stay focused?
There are many ways in which children can be helped. First of all, one can provide them an environment which is free of distractions, like when they are studying, they should not be allowed to use cellphones. Another way to help them focus would be to teach them about meditation in which they have to focus on their breath or a single sound.

4. What challenges do young people face today?
Well, I think there are two main challenges that young people face these days. The first one is related to the mind and mental health, nowadays everyone is aware of the rise in depression and suicide cases among the youth. Another challenge faced by them is the ever-increasing competition in education or their professional lives.