You should say:

What it is

When you got it

How often you use it

And explain how you feel about it

watch

Introduction:
It’s no secret that technology has become an integral part of our lives. Whether it’s our smartphones, computers, or other gadgets, they all make life easier in some way or another. But it’s not all sunshine and roses regarding technology. Sometimes, we find a piece of technology difficult to use. I’m here to talk about my experience with a piece of technology that I find challenging to use.

When did you get it?
The piece of technology that I find difficult to use is a smartwatch. It’s a device that can track my fitness activities, such as running and walking, as well as other features, such as sending and receiving notifications from my phone.

What did you get it for?
I got the smartwatch a few years ago. It was a gift from a family member who wanted me to be more active and healthy.

The purpose of the smartwatch was to help me be more aware of my physical activity and to motivate me to exercise more. It was also supposed to help me stay connected with my phone notifications, such as text messages, emails, and social media updates.

How often do you use it?
I use the smartwatch a few times a week. I use it to track my fitness activities, such as running and walking and stay connected with my phone notifications.

How do you feel about it? and Conclusion:
Overall, I’m satisfied with the smartwatch. It has helped me be more aware of my physical activity and stay connected with my phone notifications. However, I find it difficult to use because it can be complicated to set up and navigate. I don’t use many features, but I’m still trying to figure out how to use the ones I do.

1 What technology do people currently use?

2 Why do big companies introduce new products frequently?
The company's annual revenues

3 Why are people so keen on buying iPhones even though they haven’t changed much?
 ran commercials

4 Does the development of technology affect the way we study?