Describe a new development (e.g. shopping mall, park, road…) that appeared in your town or city

You should say:

What the development is

When/where you noticed it

How long it took to complete it

And explain how you feel about it

A new development that has been constructed not far from my neighbourhood is a giant shopping mall. It’s a really super modern place, built by some quite famous western and Chinese architects. It has a 100 trees on the roof and is designed in such a way to be eco-friendly in terms of energy and heating. It’s a really modern, slightly abstract cubic sort of design. Anyway, it has also got loads of really interesting and useful facilities all under one roof. There are, of course, a couple of international supermarkets, and a whole array of different restaurants, serving everything from Asian, Western to fusion cuisine. I think it took about a year or so to build this mall. I saw it through the window of my apartment under construction, so I could see them adding to it over a period of time. I think it was about 18 months it took to build maybe. I find it quite interesting – I mean, my area of the city is pretty boring so it’s nice to have something different around to do. Although I’m not hugely into malls and things like this, and although it’s quite expensive there, it’s something different to do on the weekend I suppose, and it’s a big place and in the winter it’s quite warm inside and you can try different foods and see exhibitions from time to time – there’s a sort of gallery exhibition space, you see. Sometimes they have promotional events which are entertaining. It’s alright. Personally, I prefer other things, but in recent years I’ve not travelled much or done that much and found life a bit boring, so I’ve been happy that this mall opened nearby where I live.

1 Is public transportation population in China?

2 What can be improved in public transport services in your country?

3 What leisure facilities can be used by people of all ages?

there are different types of leisure activities for all types and classes of people. There are a large number of rivers, lakes, hills and open fields are available across the country and accordingly, the people have set their own leisure activities. The most prominent leisure activities in Ireland are golfing, cycling, fishing, walking, rugby, horse riding etc. The activities are undertaken by all ages of people and help them to keep fit. Besides, these are the common forms of entertainment of the Irish people. The cycle ride helps the people to be physically fit and discover the country from a different perspective. When you are on the bicycle ride, you’ll be able to explore the nature and its wonders in the country. Besides, in line with adventures, the riders will be able to get familiar with numerous secondary streets, high mountains, and stunning landscapes of the country.

•  Why it is important for people to have time for leisure activities?
Ummm! Leisure, I think, is an important thing for the human beings and is one of the essential needs too. It is a must for several reasons and I think there are two important benefits are the key factors to make it important. Firstly, it provides us mental satisfaction for the participants in the activities, and secondly, it provides physical fitness to them as well. Recreational activities are essential for the human to live a better and healthy life. When people are engaged in their works only, their working qualities get down to a great extent. It happens as they are bored with the regular routine works. The routine makes the life dull and boring. As a result, people cannot concentrate on their activities. The quality of the work falls. But when they participate in the leisure activities, it appears that they are recharged. The regular routine is broken with the leisure activities which bear positive impacts on their body and mind. I think you will also have the same opinion about participation in the leisure activities with me, don’t you? Besides, people may not manage time to perform some physical exercise on their usual days and when they take part in different outdoor leisure activities, they go through a good form of physical pressures which help to reduce their week-long stress in a single day. So, for a wide range of reasons, people should have time for leisure activities.

•  Why are some activities more popular than others?
Right you are. Some activities are sometimes different or popular from the other activities. I’m afraid a few words are rarely enough to express the entire causes. To be brief, the activities mostly change or become popular for several reasons. Firstly, when the activity is accessible to everyone and costs less than the other activities of the same type, it becomes popular. Secondly, the activity should be easier and comfortable for all ages of people. Besides, the activity should also be entertaining. If the activity has no entertaining value, it won’t be able to attract the attention of common people. To take an example, I can recall the horse riding in Ireland. There are fewer people who own a horse for riding during the leisure hours as this is a costly issue. Besides, its maintenance is also a troublesome issue for many of the Irish. But if you consider bicycle riding, you’ll find it more popular than horse ride. Why? It is because of the accessibility. Riding a horse is easy but maintenance is tougher while there are no such notable maintenance issues with a bicycle. You’ll need a small barn for the horse whereas a bicycle could be kept at any corner of the house and even under the stairway.


 
•  Are the types of leisure activities that are popular today the same as those that were popular when your parents were young?
It is a regret that the activities are not the same as my parents did in their youths and we are doing in our times. A lot of changes have taken place regarding the leisure activities in Ireland. But it should be acknowledged that the activities have been massively changed comparing the past days. I think you are also well informed about the past leisure activities in Ireland. Earlier, there were fewer types of activities in the country but now there are a wide number of activities available around different parts the country. Horse riding, hiking and fishing were the common sources of passing leisure hours and my parents used to participate in the activities. You won’t believe how large fishes my father had caught in his early days. A day out with family and friends was another popular pastime for them which is rare in the current days. But the growth of time and technology, different sorts of activities have been invented which have influenced the youths of my days greatly. Some of the current day activities are of extreme excitement. Golfing is my preferred leisure activity and I have participated in different competitions too. My success in golfing is enviable to other golfers.

•  What types of leisure activities may become more popular in the future?
Ummm! There will be changes in the form of leisure activities. I think you have noticed that there are already changes have begun in the surroundings. The kids and youths are passing more time on social networking website, watching television programmes and playing exciting video games. I think after five to ten years, video games or social websites etc. would be the greatest source of entertainment for the youths of that time. But the appeal of hiking, fishing, day out with family and friends, riding horses etc. would remain the same as it is today.