我们抵达星云前，尚无法知道那颗星的爆炸何时发生。现在我们掌握了天体物理探测的数据，和那硕果仅存的行星上岩石的化验结果，使我能准确计算出星球爆炸的时刻。我知道这个宇宙轰天雷的闪光到达地球的年份，我意识到如今在载着我们飞奔回家的太空船后面迅速退却的超新星残核，当年曾在地球的天空中闪烁着多么耀眼的光芒。我仿佛见到那颗星，像个远方的灯塔般闪着光辉，在东方的拂晓中，引领旭日登场。

千古谜团终于解破，不容我们怀疑。但……神啊！宇宙间有亿万恒星，为什么你偏选上这颗？你用大火断送了整个世界的人，就只是为了照亮伯利恒的早晨？

杨霞翻译，发表在《科幻世界》1998.10的那一个译本

星

作者：[英]阿瑟•克拉克

这里距离梵蒂冈三千光年。我曾坚信，信仰不会因空间转移而改变，正如我曾坚信壮丽的天穹印证着神的荣耀。但如今我见证了壮丽天穹的另一面，我的信仰面临严峻考验。

我盯着那挂在舱壁上、位于马克六型电脑上方的十字架。有生以来，我第一次怀疑这十字架也许只是一个空泛的符号。

我还未将结果公开，但真相是不能隐瞒起来的。我们拍了数千帧照片，记录探测数据的磁带加起来也有数十里长。当它们被带回地球，任何人都能读到它们，而科学家们将会很容易地作出解读——甚至比我更容易。我不是那种会容忍篡改事实的人，此等行径会使我旧日声誉蒙污。

船员们己极其沮丧，我不知道他们将怎样应付这充满讽刺的结局，他们当中只有少数人有宗教信仰。打从地球出发，他们便在与我“斗争”—— 一场不公开、无恶意，但却是非常认真的思想战。即使如此，他们亦不忍用这项发现作为对付我的最后武器。船员们只觉得，一艘星际探测船上的首席天体物理学家，竟然是耶稣会教士，这是非常滑稽的。

船医钱德勒便是对此无法释怀者之一（为何医学界人士都是死硬的无神论者？）有些时候，我会在飞船的观景台上遇到他，群星闪耀，在微弱灯光下明亮不减分毫。他在黑暗中向我走过来站定，从巨大的椭圆形穹顶向外望去，随着飞船自旋，星空在我们四周缓慢转动。

“神父。”他最后总会忍不住开口，“宇宙的运行漫无止境。或许冥冥中真有个造物者，但即使如此，你真的能相信有某种存在真的会特别眷顾微不足道的我们和我们微不足道的世界吗？我只是不明白这个。”——然后争论便会开始，恒星和星云沉默地环绕着我们，在塑料观景窗外划出无尽的弧光。

我两种身份的不协调令船员感到滑稽，尽管我曾有三篇刊载于《天体物理学报》、五篇刊于《皇家天文学会每月通讯》的科学论文。我也会提醒他们，耶稣会仍以科研工作成就卓著见称，尽管略有衰落，但自十八世纪以来，在天文学和地球科学方面取得的成就数量甚至超过我们的人数。

那份由我执笔、关于凤凰星云的报告真的会结束耶稣会的千年历史吗？也许，是的，我甚至担心更多。

“凤凰”，多差劲的名字。假如为这星云取名的人有预言之意，这预言也要千亿年后才可验证。就连“星云”一词也是错误的，它和那种弥漫在银河系里的恒星胚胎素材有着天渊之别。以宇宙的尺度而言，“凤凰”星云只是个细小而稀薄的气体外壳，它包围着一颗恒星——说得准确点，应该是从前曾存在过的一颗恒星。

光谱计图表上方，挂着彼德•保罗和鲁宾斯所作的罗若拉神父画像。他看起来像是在嘲笑我。神父啊！要是你我易境而处，你会怎样对待这些数据呢？我的信仰不足以支持我挺身而起，面对这个挑战。你的呢？

神父啊！你凝望远方，但我所走的距离，远远超出你创立耶稣会那个时代所能理解和想像的世界。过去从未有过探测船离开地球这么远。我们飞到远在宇宙边陲的地方。我们终于飞抵凤凰星云，并且带着重大的发现，踏上返回地球老家的路。可是这发现对我是沉重的负担，我只有跨越时间和空间，向你作无声的求援。

你手握的书，上面印着“主之荣耀至大至高”。但当你有机会目睹我们的发现，你还会相信这句话吗？

“凤凰星云”的本质很好理解——仅仅银河系里，每年便有百多个恒星爆炸。它们突然在几天甚至几小时内，光亮骤增至平常的千万倍，然后声沉影寂。这些爆炸的星是“新星”——它们只不过是宇宙灾难中的家常便饭。我在月球天文台工作时，就曾记录过十多个新星的光谱和变光曲线。

而每隔几百年，就会出现令新星也显得微不足道的天文奇观。当一颗星变成超新星时，它的光比银河系所有恒星加起来还要明亮，古代中国天文学家曾在１０５４年见过这样的情景。１５１２年，仙后座又出现一颗光亮得白昼也可见的超新星。随后的一千年间，还出现过三颗超新星。

我们的任务便是访问此类灾难现场，寻求灾难的起因，要是可能的话，也许还会查知超新星的成因。我们的太空船穿越了六千年前爆发开来的气体。这气体是炽热的，仍在迸发出紫色的光辉，只是它非常稀薄，不足以伤害我们。层层如象牙球的气体被爆炸的星体使劲抛出，至今仍在向外飞驰。恒星的引力也无力将它们拉回去。气体包含的空间容得下数千个太阳系，而盘踞中心的是一个怪异的天体，一个只有地球般大小，却比地球重数百万倍的白矮星。

太空船周围气体的光辉驱散了平常星际空间的黑暗。我们的目标如同一个被引爆的太空炸弹，几千年过去了，其火热的碎片还在四散飞开。爆炸规模之大，使星体的碎片散布于数十亿公里的空间中，恍若凝固。或许几个世代之后，肉眼可以察觉出那些混沌的气体和纠缠的旋涡有些微移动。但此刻星云的澎湃气势，已够慑人心魄了。

我们数小时前己关闭了主要动力，以余速飞向那凶险的小矮星。它曾和我们的太阳无甚分别，可惜它却将能使它活命数百万年的能量，一口气在数小时内耗散掉了。我们所见的只是个吝啬每一分能量的小星，像要补偿那白白虚耗了的光芒。

在这个景况下找到行星，几乎是妄想。即使过去曾有行星，也在爆炸时化为蒸汽，和碎片与星云的气体混为一体了。不过，我们还是作了一趟自动搜索（这是飞越从来未探测过的恒星时必定要做的程序），竟然发现了一个孤单的行星。它的轨迹离星云中心的矮星很远很远。它的处境，正像太阳系的冥王星。这个行星徘徊在星际间永恒黑夜的边沿，从未尝过生机带来的温馨。但正是遥远的距离使它幸免于像其同伴般被气化的厄运。

行星的表面历尽劫难，不要说曾覆盖地表的固态气体，就连岩石也被烧炙过了。我们登陆，并发现了石窟。

石窟的建造者肯定尽了一切努力，确保它会让后来者发现。入口处的石标只剩下一摊凝固的熔岩，但从远距离侦察图片中，我们己相当肯定它是智慧的标志。稍后，我们又侦察到广泛分布在行星各处的放射性辐射，石窟外的石标可以毁掉，但辐射纹印是抹不掉的，它还会不停向周围发出讯号。而我们的太空船像箭一般射向这个大标靶的红心。

石标原本应有一里高，现今却像一支正熔化的蜡烛。我们以天文学家的身份而来，现在却要兼任考古学家。不过我们都将原来的目标抛诸脑后，我们明白，他们选这个偏远的行星，建立这个庞大的标记，只有一个作用：一个文明的族类，自知难逃劫数，希望留下一些不朽之物。

我们得花上几个世代才能完全消化石窟内的珍藏。他们的太阳爆发前必定早有预兆，故此他们有充分的时间准备，可以将他们想留传后世的精华都带到此地藏好，期待日后给其他族类发掘出来，而不被遗忘。换了我们，会有这样的干劲吗？或者是被困在愁苦中，懒得理会那活不到也触摸不到的将来？

哪怕再多给他们一点时间啊！他们已经学会在行星之间旅行，却还远未能跨越恒星之间的鸿沟。而且即使离他们最近的恒星系，也有一百光年之遥。

尽管留下的雕塑来看，他们和人类的外形殊无相似之处，但我们仍会为他们的命运而悲哀。他们留下上千件视像纪录，连同放映的机器，还有精心制作的图片，我们毫不费力地就明白了他们的语言。我们仔细研读这些记录，一个长达六千年的温暖而美丽的文明重现在我们眼前，在很多方面比我们的世界更好。或许他们只将最好的一面留给我们看，但谁能为此责怪他们？他们优美的城市绝不比地球逊色。我们看着他们工作、玩乐，他们悠扬如歌的语言跨越数个世纪的时光被我们听见。一个画面至今徘徊在我的眼前：一群孩子在蓝沙的海滩上嬉戏，就像地球上的那些孩子一样。

海平线尽头夕阳西下，他们太阳的余晖，仍照暖大地。有谁知道，这太阳快将变成夺命判官，定这族类的死罪？

想必是我们久尝孤独，思乡心切，才会深受感动。我们当中很多人到过其它星球，探索过其它文明的遗迹，却从未有像今天这般深的感触。

这一悲剧是独一无二的，这是一个族类的败亡，犹如地球上国家和文化的兴衰。然而，一个文明在它璀璨的极盛之时被如此彻底地摧毁……这一事实要怎样才能释义为神的慈悲？

我的队员曾这样问过，我也曾尽力答复。罗若拉神父，你或许更有把握，但神灵对我全无启示。这些异族不是邪恶的，我不知道他们崇拜怎样的神。但我曾回望数十世纪的岁月，见证他们用最后的努力所保留下来的珍爱之物，在如今萎缩衰亡了的太阳照耀下出土。

这个问题，在回到地球后同僚们将会怎样回答，我早已料到。他们会这样说：宇宙万事万物既无目的也无宏图，既然银河系内每年都有上百颗恒星爆炸，此刻在太空深处，必有文明被毁灭。无论这个族类是邪恶还是善良，与其面对的厄运毫不相干：宇宙没有神，没有天理，是故亦无天谴。又或者，我们在凤凰星云所见的一切，都不能证明什么。坚持上述论据的人，只是感情用事，而不是据理立论。神不须向人交待他的行事方式，他能造宇宙；也能毁灭宇宙。如果我们竟要论断神的行事，那只是人的高傲自大、目空一切——甚至可称之为亵渎。

我本可硬起心肠接受这一切——整个星球的文明被大火化为灰烬的事实。但凡事都有极限，人的信仰亦然。当计算结果呈现，我知道我一度坚定的信仰已经开始动摇。

我们抵达星云前，尚无法知道那颗星的爆炸何时发生。现在我们掌握了天体物理探测的数据，和那硕果仅存的行星上岩石的化验结果，使我能准确计算出星球爆炸的时刻。我知道这个宇宙轰天雷的闪光到达地球的年份，我意识到如今在载着我们飞奔回家的太空船后面迅速退却的超新星残核，当年曾在地球的天空中闪烁着多么耀眼的光芒。我仿佛见到那颗星，像个远方的灯塔般闪着光辉，在东方的拂晓中，引领旭日登场。

千古谜团终于解破，不容我们怀疑。但……神啊！宇宙间有亿万恒星，为什么你偏选上这颗？你用大火断送了整个世界的人，就只是为了照亮伯利恒的早晨？





Arthur C. Clarke: The Star

        It is three thousand light-years to the Vatican. Once I believed that space could have no power over faith. Just as I believed that the heavens declared the glory of God's handiwork. Now I have seen that handiwork, and my faith is sorely troubled.
        I stare at the crucifix that hangs on the cabin wall above the Mark VI computer, and for the first time in my life I wonder if it is no more than an empty symbol. I have told no one yet, but the truth cannot be concealed. The data are there for anyone to read, recorded on the countless miles of magnetic tape and the thousands of photographs we are carrying back to Earth. Other scientists can interpret them as easily as I can--more easily, in all probability. I am not one who would condone that tampering with the truth which often gave my order a bad name in the olden days.
        The crew is already sufficiently depressed, I wonder how they will take this ultimate irony. Few of them have any religious faith, yet they will not relish using this final weapon in their campaign against me--that private, good-natured but fundamentally serious war which lasted all the way from Earth. It amused them to have a Jesuit as chief astrophysicist. Dr. Chandler, for instance, could never get over it (why are medical men such notorious atheists?). Sometimes he would meet me on the observation deck, where the lights are always low, so that the stars shine with undiminished glory. He would come up to me in the gloom and stand staring out of the great oval port, while the heavens crawled slowly round us as the ship turned end over end with the residual spin we had never bothered to correct.
        "Well, Father," he would say at last. "It goes on forever and forever, and perhaps Something made it. But how you can believe that Something has a special interest in us and our miserable little world--that just beats me." Then the argument would start, while the stars and nebulae would swing around us in silent, endless arcs beyond the flawlessly clear plastic of the observation port. It was, I think, the apparent incongruity of my position which, yes, amused the crew. In vain I would point to my three papers in the Astrophysical Journal, my five in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. I would remind them that our order has long been famous for its scientific works. We may be few now, but ever since the eighteenth century we have made contributions to astronomy and geophysics out of all proportion to our numbers.
        Will my report on the Phoenix Nebula end our thousand years of history? It will end, I fear, much more than that. I do not know who gave the nebula its name, which seems to me a very bad one. If it contains a prophecy, it is one which cannot be verified for several thousand million years. Even the word "nebula" is misleading; this is a far smaller object than those stupendous clouds of mist--the stuff of unborn stars--which are scattered throughout the length of the Milky Way. On the cosmic scale, indeed, the Phoenix Nebula is a tiny thing--a tenuous shell of gas surrounding a single star. Or what is left of a star . . .
        The Rubens engraving of Loyola seems to mock me as it hangs there above the spectrophotometer tracings. What would you, Father, have made of this knowledge that has come into my keeping, so far from the little world that was all the universe you knew? Would your faith have risen to the challenge, as mine has failed to do? You gaze into the distance, Father, but I have traveled a distance beyond any that you could have imagined when you founded our order a thousand years ago. No other survey ship has been so far from Earth: we are at the very frontiers of the explored universe. We set out to reach the Phoenix Nebula, we succeeded, and we are homeward bound with our burden of knowledge. I wish I could lift that burden from my shoulders, but I call to you in vain across the centuries and the light-years that lie between us. On the book you are holding the words are plain to read. "AD MAIOREM DEI GLORIAM," the message runs, but it is a message I can no longer believe. Would you still believe it if you could see what we have found?
        We knew, of course, what the Phoenix Nebula was. Every year, in our galaxy alone, more than a hundred stars explode, blazing for a few hours or days with thousands of times their normal brilliance before they sink back into death and obscurity. Such are the ordinary novae--the commonplace disasters of the universe. I have rocorded the spectrograms and light curves of dozens, since I started working at the lunar observatory. But three or four times in every thousand years occurs something beside which even a nova pales into total insignificance.
        When a star becomes a supernova, it may for a little while outshine all the massed suns of the galaxy. The Chinese astronomers watched this happen in A.D. 1054, not knowing what it was they saw. Five centuries later, in 1572, a supernova blazed in Cassiopeia so brilliantly that it was visible in the daylight sky. There have been three more in the thousand years that have passed since then. Our mission was to visit the remnants of such a catastrophe, to reconstruct the events that led up to it, and, if possible, to learn its cause. We came slowly in through the concentric shells of gas that had been blasted out six thousand years before, yet were expanding still. They were immensely hot, radiating still with a fierce violet light, but far too tenuous to do us any damage. When the star had exploded, its outer layers had been driven upward with such speed that they had escaped completely from its gravitational field. Now they formed a hollow shell large enough to engulf a thousand solar systems, and at its center burned the tiny, fantastic object which the star had now become--a white dwarf, smaller than the Earth, yet weighing a million times as much. The glowing gas shells were all around us, banishing the normal night of interstellar space. We were flying into the center of a cosmic bomb that had detonated millennia ago and whose incandescent fragments were still hurtling apart. The immense scale of the explosion, and the fact that the debris already covered a volume of space many billions of miles across, robbed the scene of any visible movement. It would take decades before the unaided eye could detect any motion in these tortured wisps and eddies of gas, yet the sense of turbulent expansion was overwhelming. We had checked our primary drive hours before and were drifting slowly toward the fierce little star ahead. Once it had been a sun like our own, but it had squandered in a few hours the energy that should have kept it shining for a million years. Now it was a shrunken miser, hoarding its resources as if trying to make amends for its prodigal youth.
        No one seriously expected to find planets. If there had been any before the explosion, they would have been boiled into puffs of vapor and their substance lost in the greater wreckage of the star itself. But we made the automatic search, as always when approaching an unknown sun, and presently we found a single small world circling the star at an immense distance. It must have been the Pluto of this vanished solar system, orbiting on the frontiers of the night. Too far from the central sun ever to have known life, its remoteness had saved it from the fate of all its lost com- panions.
        The passing fires had seared its rocks and burned away the mantle of frozen gas that must have covered it in the days before the disaster. We landed, and we found the Vault.
        Its builders had made sure that we should. The monolithic marker that stood above the entrance was now a fused stump, but even the first long-range photographs told us that here was the work of intelligence. A little later we detected the continent-wide pattern of radioactivity that had been buried in the rock. Even if the pylon above the Vault had been destroyed, this would have remained, an immovable and all but eternal beacon calling to the stars. Our ship fell toward this gigantic bull's-eye like an arrow into its target.
        The pylon must have been a mile high when it was built, but now it looked like a candle that had melted down into a puddle of wax. It took us a week to drill through the fused rock, since we did not have the proper tools for a task like this. We were astronomers, not archaeologists, but we could improvise. Our original program was forgotten: this lonely monument, reared at such labor at the greatest possible distance from the doomed sun, could have only one meaning. A civilization which knew it was about to die had made its last bid for immortality.
        It will take us generations to examine all the treasures that were placed in the Vault. They had plenty of time to prepare, for their sun must have given its first warnings many years before the final detonation. Everything that they wished to preserve, all the fruits of their genius, they brought here to this distant world in the days before the end, hoping that some other race would find them and that they would not be utterly forgotten.
        If only they had a little more time! They could travel freely enough between the planets of their own sun, but they had not yet learned to cross the interstellar gulfs, and the nearest solar system was a hundred light-years away. Even if they had not been so disturbingly human as their sculpture shows, we could not have helped admiring them and grieving for their fate. They left thousands of visual records and the machines for projecting them, together with elaborate pictorial instructions from which it will not be difficult to learn their written language. We have examined many of these records, and brought to life for the first time in six thousand years the warmth and beauty of a civilization which in many ways must have been superior to our own. Perhaps they only showed us the best, and one can hardly blame them. But their worlds were very lovely, and their cities were built with a grace that matches anything of ours. We have watched them at work and play, and listened to their musical speech sounding across the centuries. One scene is still before my eyes--a group of children on a beach of strange blue sand, playing in the waves as children play on Earth.
        And sinking into the sea, still warm and friendly and life-giving, is the sun that will soon turn traitor and obliterate all this innocent happiness.
        Perhaps if we had not been so far from home and so vulnerable to loneliness, we should not have been so deeply moved. Many of us had seen the ruins of ancient civilizations on other worlds, but they had never affected us so profoundly.
        This tragedy was unique. It was one thing for a race to fail and die, as nations and cultures have done on Earth. But to be destroyed so completely in the full flower of its achievement, leaving no survivors--how could that be reconciled with the mercy of God?
        My colleagues have asked me that, and I have given what answers I can. Perhaps you could have done better, Father Loyola, but I have found nothing in the Exercitia spiritualia that helps me here. They were not an evil people: I do not know what gods they worshiped, if indeed they worshiped any. But I have looked back at them across the centuries, and have watched while the loveliness they used their last strength to preserve was brought forth again into the light of their shrunken sun.
        I know the answers that my colleagues will give when they get back to Earth. They will say that the universe has no purpose and no plan, that since a hundred suns explode every year in our galaxy, at this very moment some race is dying in the depths of space. Whether that race has done good or evil during its lifetime will make no difference in the end: there is no divine justice, for there is no God. Yet, of course, what we have seen proves nothing of the sort. Anyone who argues thus is being swayed by emotion, not logic. God has no need to justify His actions to man. He who built the universe can destroy it when He chooses. It is arrogance--it is perilously near blasphemy for us to say what He may or may not do.
        This I could have accepted, hard though it is to look upon whole worlds and peoples thrown into the furnace. But there comes a point when even the deepest faith must falter, and now, as I look at my calculations, I know I have reached that point at last.
        We could not tell, before we reached the nebula, how long ago the explosion took place. Now, from the astronomical evidence and the record in the rocks of that one surviving planet, I have been able to date it very exactly. I know in what year the light of this colossal conflagration reached Earth. I know how brilliantly the supernova whose corpse now dwindles behind our speeding ship once shone in terrestrial skies. I know how it must have blazed low in the East before sunrise, like a beacon in that Oriental dawn. There can be no reasonable doubt: the ancient mystery is solved at last. Yet O God, there were so many stars you could have used.
        What was the need to give these people to the fire, that the symbol of their passing might shine above Bethlehem?
