别人问姜文《一步之遥》致敬了哪些电影，姜文却说：“我这么狂妄一人，没那个习惯。” 就好像《本命年》在柏林电影节参展，并获得柏林国际电影节银熊奖时，记者采访姜文，说他的表演很像马龙·白兰度、罗伯特·德尼罗，问姜文是不是很喜欢他们，姜文说：“对不起，我没听说过他们。” 可是有人“泄密”：姜文找谢飞要了《愤怒的公牛》录像带，因为他特别喜欢罗伯特·德尼罗这个演员，想学习硬汉表演法。
他说：“我就是想让你们知道，他（毛）有些不是你们说的那样。”
因为象征并不一定是一一对应的，也不必是每个都要有标的，就像鲁迅先生说的，“人物的模特儿也一样，没有专用过一个人，往往嘴在浙江，脸在北京，衣服在山西，是一个拼凑起来的脚色”，例如张牧之显然是毛泽东和追随过松坡将军蔡锷的朱德的混合；金庸的小说《笑傲江湖》隐喻那时事务，可是显然并不是每人每事都有的。
隐喻是多线的，既可以是国共斗争时，也可以是建国后。
马拉着列车（马列）开来了，上面有着早已不用了武昌起义的铁血十八星，“县长”与文人喉舌们“吃着火锅唱着歌”。黄四郎有一颗在辛亥革命引爆了的珍藏版地雷。“辛亥不是一个地方，辛亥是一种革命”。国民革命虽然成功了，但是黄四郎们却成了既得利益者。此时此刻，恰如彼时彼刻。
开头马邦德说“刘邦是个小人”，而（真正的）汤师爷转用项羽的“力拔山兮气盖世”，是因为过去人们常把共产党比作刘邦，国民党比作项羽。
统治阶级、资产阶级、官僚们常用的手段就是“拉拢豪绅、交税捐款……百姓跟着交钱，得钱之后，豪绅的钱如数奉还，百姓的钱三七分成”。而黄四郎用假麻子借张麻子之名自演劫走烟土，再以剿匪之名敛财。
他教人们“不准跪”。
六子的死意味着在那时的社会环境下，好人不能辩白，就得被人拿枪指着，否则就不能称之为好人，得把自己的肚子剖开才能（甚至也不能）证明自己没有吃两碗粉。
有人说，鸿门宴指的是重庆谈判。发钱指的是对国统区的经济战。但这些事也可能同时指解放后。
老三显然是指邓和以邓为代表的那一群人。老三装模作样地戴着大哥的九筒。他是想拿大哥的九筒呢？还是他戴着大哥的九筒发号施令了呢？
“当麻匪要听命令”，这是党的纪律。可是老三却对老大阳奉阴为。
敌人装扮成ta们的样子。
“这他xx妈是八岁”的大跃进是软弱的、立场不坚定的动摇分子和知识分子（汤师爷）的儿子。
人们总要以为一个麻匪的名字不能叫“张牧之”，而要叫“张麻子”，而且他的脸上真的要有麻子。
人们眼里的他的不好的印象，都是被欺骗了；那些以为是他干的不好的事，都是别人干的。其它的事情他没有责任，他不知情。
一部分“牺牲”的人们和知识分子是因为假麻子被炸死的。
人民是麻木的、迟钝的，“谁赢他们帮谁”。要有一个青天大老爷来，一个“老天爷”带领ta们。尽管最后总是需要人民的力量。
可是那向人性（人们的软弱、贪婪、局限；阶层）开战的“最后的舞蹈”的美丽的残酷，又去哪里了呢？那放肆的私刑遍地的群众性的猎巫运动、和惨烈的斗争、群众的互害，被消去了。姜文在《让子弹飞》开头对于地下党“军民同乐”的神话的反思已经褪去了。
人民拿走了一切，就连他坐下的位置也被拿走了。可是户籍、城乡二元体制、剪刀差呢？
老三在黄四郎那里“见识到了”，被诱惑了，背叛了革命，他带着曾经一支枪对着自己，一支枪对着敌人（革命与自我革命）更美的女子去了上海，“浦东*就是上海，上海就是浦东”。黄四郎又回来了，他借着师爷的皮，借着知识分子、小资产阶级、民族资产阶级的皮又回来了。
一个幽灵，毛主义的幽灵，正飘荡在历史的轨道上，留下一个夕阳下远去的背影。
 
*浦东民国时尚不存在

Jiang Wen was once asked about the films parodied in his 'Por Una Cabeza,' but he responded, 'I'm arrogant and not in the habit of doing that.' Similarly, at the Berlin Film Festival where 'Black Snow' won the Silver Bear, a reporter compared Jiang Wen's performance to Marlon Brando and Robert De Niro. When asked if he liked them, Jiang Wen replied, 'Sorry, I haven't heard of them.' However, it was later 'leaked' that Jiang Wen had requested the video tape of 'Raging Bull' from Xie Fei, the director of 'Black Snow,' expressing admiration for Robert De Niro and a desire to learn his tough guy acting method.

Jiang Wen emphasized, 'I just want you to know that he (Mao) is not what you think he is.'

Symbols don't always have a one-to-one correspondence with what they represent. For instance, ZHANG Muzhi (Pocky Zhang) is clearly a blend of Mao and Zhu De, the latter having followed General Song Po (Cai E, who crusaded against Yuan Shikai, the restorer of the imperial system in the Republic). Similarly, Jin Yong's novel 'The Smiling, Proud Wanderer' metaphorically represents both the First and Second Republics of China, although not every character or plot point directly symbolizes something.

This story serves as a metaphor for multiple periods, encompassing both the time of the Chinese Civil War and the era following the founding of the People's Republic of China.

The horse-drawn train, symbolizing Marxism-Leninism (or 'horse-train' in Chinese), arrives, carrying the long-lost Iron Blood Eighteen Stars-the flag pattern from the Wuchang Uprising. Alongside, intellectuals indulge in 'eating hot pot and singing songs.' Despite the success of the National Revolution,, the era remains the same as the past. HUANG Silang, who participated in the 1911 Revolution (with the Wuchang Uprising as its starting point, leading to the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty and the monarchy), assumes a new dominant role, oppressing the people as before.

Mao arrives in the remote provincial town, assuming the role of its new mayor, and taught the people 'no kneeling.'

The death of the sixth elder brother (the second youngest brother) symbolizes a societal belief that good people should not defend themselves. Instead, they are expected to be held at gunpoint and have their hearts cut open to prove their innocence.

Enemies disguised as communists oppressed the people.

The third eldest brother (Deng Xiaoping (rice shopping) (Deng was partially responsible for the famine, and although Deng's reform and opening up changed China, it also opened the door to corruption and power rent-seeking)) pretended to wear the mask of the eldest brother (Mao). Was he trying to take big brother's seat? Or did he give orders while wearing big brother's mask?

Great Leap Forward and the Great Chinese Famine was the son of intellectuals/propagandists. It wasn't Mao who bombed intellectuals, but rather the fake Mao.

People commonly believed that a bandit's name couldn't be "Zhang Muzhi" (shepherd), but rather "Pocky Zhang," and that his face should genuinely have pockmarks.

The negative perceptions people held of Mao were a result of deception; the harmful actions attributed to him were actually carried out by others.

He was not accountable for the rest, including the famine and other events; he was unaware. Consequently, he should not bear the blame.

The people were indifferent and sluggish. "They support whoever emerges victorious." They appealed to a great lord for justice, a man from heaven to guide them. Yet, in the end, the power of the people was always necessary. I term this historical perspective the "hunk man theory," envisioning a charismatic leader descending from heaven to lead the people. Unfortunately, they fail to grasp control of their destiny, entrusting it to others.

But where did the captivating brutality of his "last revolution" (The Cultural Revolution) go, his final dance of war against human nature itself-human weakness, limitations, greed, and societal classes? This film fails to depict this significant part of history. The mass witch-hunting movement during the Cultural Revolution, marked by unbridled lynchings across the nation, is notably absent in the movie.

The people took everything away, even the chair he (Mao) was sitting in. However, what about the dualistic structure of urban and rural areas (the artificial division of people and constraints on population movement with a household registration system), and the Price scissors?

Deng Xiaoping succumbed to temptation, betraying the revolution by taking a woman who used to be "more beautiful" with revolution and self-revolution to Shanghai (capitalism), where bureaucrats and capitalists returned in the guise of counselors and intellectuals.

A specter is haunting the track of history-the specter of Maoism, leaving a distant silhouette in the sunset.
