（语言）哲学与现实：
1993年最高法院史密斯诉美国案件 Smith v. United States (1993) 认为，根据联邦法规，以枪换取毒品构成“使用”枪支。 1
 
1 《美国法典》第 18 卷第 924(c)(1)条（2006 年）： [任何人......[在实施暴力犯罪或贩毒过程中]使用或携带枪支 在实施暴力犯罪或贩毒过程中]使用或携带枪支者 除对该[项]罪行规定的处罚外，......还应 ......处以不少于五年的监禁。处以不少于五年的监禁。
18 U.S. code section 924(c)(1) (2006).[A]ny person who . . . uses or carries a firearm [in the course of committing a crime of vio lence or drug trafficking] shall, in addition to the punishment provided for such [a] crime . . . be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than five years.
 
斯卡利亚大法官提出反对意见：
在寻求法定含义时，我们赋予非技术性词汇和短语以普通含义。. . . 使用工具通常是指将其用于预期目的。当有人问“你用手杖吗？”时，他不是在询问你是否有你祖父的银柄手杖摆在大厅里；他想知道你是否用手杖走路。同样，说到“使用枪支”，就是说到枪支的特殊用途，即作为武器使用。当然，“一个人可以以多种方式使用枪支”，......包括作为交换物品......，但这不是“使用”枪支的普通含义。
法院断言，这一论点的“重大缺陷”在于，“说‘使用枪支’的通常含义包括将枪支用作武器”与说通常含义“也排除任何其他用途”是完全不同的。这两者的确不同，但我所断言的正是后者。“使用枪支”的普通含义不包括将枪支用作商业物品。例如，如果证人在检察官询问他是否曾“使用过枪支”时回答 "没有"，即使他曾将其祖父的恩菲尔德步枪卖给一个收藏家，我认为这显然不符合作伪证定罪的客观虚假性要求。
In the search for statutory meaning, we give nontechnical words and phrases their ordinary meaning. . . . To use an instrumentality ordinarily means to use it for its intended purpose. When someone asks, “Do you use a cane?,” he is not inquiring whether you have your grand father’s silver- handled walking stick on display in the hall; he wants to know whether you walk with a cane. Similarly, to speak of “using a firearm” is to speak of using it for its distinctive purpose, i.e., as a weapon. To be sure, “one can use a firearm in a number of ways,” . . . including as an article of exchange . . . but that is not the ordinary meaning of “using” the one or the other. 
The Court asserts that the “significant flaw” in this argument is that “to say that the ordinary meaning of ‘uses a firearm’ includes using a firearm as a weapon” is quite diff er ent from saying that the ordinary meaning “also excludes any other use.” The two are indeed diff er ent— but it is precisely the latter that I assert to be true. The ordinary meaning of “uses a firearm” does not include using it as an article of commerce. I think it perfectly obvious, for example, that the objective falsity requirement for a perjury conviction would not be satisfied if a witness answered “no” to a prosecutor’s inquiry whether he had ever “used a firearm,” even though he had once sold his grand father’s Enfield rifle to a collector.
Ibid., p. 242, n. 1.

 
法院多数法官指出： 当一个词没有被法规定义时，我们通常按照其普通或自然含义来解释。. . . 当然，请愿人对其[枪支]的处理可以说是[枪支]日常含义中的“使用”。请愿人“使用”他的[枪支]，试图用它来换取可卡因，从而获得毒品。
The Court majority pointed out that this was false: When a word is not defined by statute, we normally construe it in accord with its ordinary or natu ral meaning. . . . Surely petitioner’s treatment of his [gun] can be described as “use” [of the firearm] within the everyday meaning of that term. Petitioner “used” his [gun] in an attempt to obtain drugs by offering to trade it for cocaine.
Ibid., p. 228.