（战争与和平的例子）

“We say, for instance, that Jane Austen wrote six novels; and in so saying we appear to imply the existence of the six novels that Jane Austen wrote. But just what are these novels? Austen wrote the novels by writing certain manuscripts. Yet the novels are not the author’s manuscripts. A novel, at least once it has been published, does not cease to exist if the original manuscript is destroyed. One reads the novels by reading certain hardcovers or paperbacks. Yet the novels are not the hardcovers or paperbacks. If one borrows a paperback of Emma, reads it, buys a hardcover, and reads that, then one has read not two novels, but one novel twice. The novels, whatever they may be, are not made of paper and ink. They are not ordinary things: they are not things of the sort philosophers call concrete.”

The concept of number did not suddenly arise when some philosopher had a transcendental vision and thought, “My goodness, there exist amazing non-physical things, and I have just had an astonishing connection to them, even though my body is physical and these things are not. I will now write down what I know about them.”

No, of course not. The concept of numbers developed slowly over time, from simple notches on a stick to more complex concepts. But until relatively recently, all such development was based on real world observation, and on what worked and what did not when applied to real world situations. Philosophical concerns about such matters as the “meaning” of numbers were utterly irrelevant to builders and traders who used the concept of number in their daily work - and they still are.

I could also say that Austen’s novels are 19th Century, and that the 19th Century is important for its place in human history, and by so doing I would not be making any presumption that there “exists” an independent non-physical entity that is the 19th Century. By using the term “six” I would simply be noting that certain groups of things have common properties.

information could have multiple cotainer

