notes on kant


. why kant thought that the law of natural science must be known a priori? It might be that In kant law of natural science is necessary, and what is necessary must be a priori as well, so law of natural science must be a priori.  （“这种必然性是经验无从教导我的”，《未来形而上学导论》，1，2，西，p251）


. reveling practical reason by restricting pure reason, c.f. （纯粹理性批判第二版序，B xxiv-xxxi，西方哲学原著选读，p246-9）


. conceptualism and non-~

Are the lines that divide "different objects" "concept"? (Without "concept", we could even not distinguish between things) And the images given by intuition/sensations (sense data? Kant seems not think there is. Or in kant is pure intuition.(康德：《逻辑学讲义》，许景行译，北京：商务印书馆，2010年，第24页：“野蛮人看到远处的一座房子，却不知道它的用途，他在自身的表象中所具有的，和另一个明确知道房子是人们设置的住宅的人所具有的，正是同一客体。然而从形式方面看，同一客体的知识在两者中是有区别的。在野蛮人那里，这种知识是单纯的直观，而在另一个人那里则同时是直观和概念。”，Robert Horácio de Sá Pereira, What Is Nonconceptualism in Kant's Philosophy? Philosophical Studies,164.1,2013,p.234.) may not be constant or even not be ontologicially independent. And because of vagueness,  its ontological role is inscrutable, which means, it simply pose a question: whether the "Bent chopsticks" objective("object" here means not independent of us but constant even in that instant.).

(In kant, there are "triple syntheses": of apprehension, of reproduction and of recognition. According to Allais, only in the third synthesis, the synthesis of recognition, are concepts explicitly included, and imagination for the other two. For the synthesis of apprehension, “每一个直观都在自身中包含着一个杂多，如果心灵没有在印象的彼此接续中分辨出那个时间，这个杂多就不能被表象为杂多；由于被含纳于一瞬，表象无非就是绝对的统一”(A99). Here the synthesis of intuition comes from the formal condition of  inneren Sinne, time, and the unity of time itself does not need understanding and concepts. She argues that conceptualists such as MacDowell confuse sensation with intuition, and that the so-called "myth of giving" comes from this confusion. At best, we can say that sensation is mannigfaltig, but we must not assume that intuition is as well. Intuition is able to give objects directly, does not need conceptual ability. Kant does not give sensation an epistemological role, but it does not follow from this that Kantian intuition is dependent on the role of concepts in presenting individuals ...... sensations are non-intentional or non-referential, they do not give objects to the mind per se ...... but intuitions are direct, single representations, which essentially involve the object being represented. (Lucy Allais,Kant,Non-Conceptual Content and the Representation of Space.))

However, in kant it's just intuition but not concept gives us objects, and the intuition is associated with the object, and which is single, directly. On the other hand, concept is associated with individuals by commenality of some, indirectly.(A320/B377) **In Kant, it is through a priori forms of intuition, especially space, that we acquire external representations and become aware of something as external to us and distinct from other things.** We perceiving a specific individual means that we perceive Individuals in a specific spatio-temporal framel, that individual distingusihed from other individuals by its own unity, **has its own boundy** and place/position, and is connected to other things Spatiotemporally. This characteristic cannot be given by a concept, because it does not distinguish individuals, as the concept of "tree" does not play a role in the perception of a tree (as an individual object), but only in the further judgment of that tree. The expression "a tree" can be used in many contexts, in relation to many trees, if we do not consider the specific individual being given. In Relation to this, the immediacy of intuition reflects the Kantian position of direct realist, where objects are given directly to our consciousness; in contrast, concepts are representations of objects that need to be formed on the basis of direct givens, through so-called "共同标志". If we view concepts as presupposition of perceptual experience, we undermine Kant's direct realist position, and the reality of concepts in a priori deduction becomes suspect. (Lucy Allais,Non-Conceptual Content and the Representation of Space.)

more recent critics have clarified the distinction between categories and empirical concepts, emphasizing concepts as constitutive elements of perceived objects only in the former sense. Aaron Griffith distinguishes between two levels of concepts.(similar strategu, c.f. Kevin Connolly,Which Kantian Conceptualism (or Nonconceptualism)? The Southern Journal of Philosophy,52,3.2014.) In the case of empirical intuition, there is no need for a corresponding empirical concept, as perceiving a tree does not require a prior concept of "tree". But Griffith argues that even if Kantian non-conceptualism can show that the empirical content of perception is non-conceptual, the pure content of perception is still conceptual.
Griffiths analyzes an important textual basis for nonconceptualism:“因为很可能现象是这样被造成的，以至于知性会发现它们完全不符合它的统一性条件，而一切都处于这样的混乱中……同样，现象将会把对象呈现给我们，因为直观不需要任何的思维机能”(A90/B123)，however, the context is what kant says before this passage:“因为感性直观的对象必须符合先天地蕴含在心灵中的形式条件，这一点是清楚明白的，否则它们就不会成为我们的对象；但是，它们除此之外也必须符合知性为了思维的综合统一所需要的条件，对这一点就不大容易看出结论了。”(A90/B122-3)Thus, the passage that seems to support non-conceptualism is merely used by Kant to show why it is "不太容易" and does not represent Kant's own claims. Nor does he agree with Allais's claim that 感知所需的综合功能凭借想象力的综合就能完成，“综合的这三个方面是不可分割的，全部参与到感知中”，就知性涉及的再生的综合而言，如果没有这种作用，我们就不会有同一个意识行为，也就不会有同一个感知的对象。(Aaron Griffith,Perception and the Categories:A Coneeptualist Reading of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason,European Journal of Philosophy,20.2,2012,p.201.)


glossary:

complex-mannigfaltig; noun: Mannigfaltigkeit; intuition-Anschauung; Erscheinung-appearance; Apperzeption-Apperception; transzendental-transcendental; Ding an sich-thing-in-itself