
语词之争，问题或许在真值语义学，如果有什么东西被还原的话，它们不是被还原为一种神经形式，而是大脑里的动向，因此，当我否定你的一句话时，它并不是逻辑上的否定

http://www.scholardarity.com/?p=3016

在一个邻近的可能世界里，我的一个对应体（counterpart）在离开一场哲学会议的时候偶然听到了这样一场对话：


史密斯：你关于 "多 "的问题（Problem of the many）的报告做得很好! 你几乎说服了我放弃了多主义（multipleism）。

琼斯：很高兴听你这么说! 我几乎说服了你们中的多少人？

史密斯：哈哈。好吧，无论如何，我希望你有一个好的周末!

琼斯：（自嘲地笑了笑）

史密斯：有什么好笑的？

琼斯：呃......没什么。

史密斯：得了，说出来吧。

琼斯：好吧，我以前从未想过这个问题，但我突然想到，我们把星期六和星期天称为 "周末"，而星期天实际上是一周的第一天。把一周的第一天算作它结尾的一部分，这有点不协调，不是吗？

史密斯：嗯...这很有趣。我想我一直认为星期一是一周的第一天。

琼斯：啊，直觉的冲突! 不管怎么说，对我们来说多么…平常啊。也许我认为星期天是一周的第一天是因为我是圣公会教徒，而你认为是星期一是因为你是不可知论者？

史密斯：等一下...... "直觉"？你是说你是一个关于 “星期几 ”的实在论者？

琼斯：嗯，是的。我为什么不呢？毕竟，今天是星期五，对吗？而星期五是一周中的一天。所以，既然今天确实是星期五......

史密斯：一个语义论证？哈？接下来你就会告诉我你认为洞（holes）也是存在的! “毕竟，瑞士奶酪上充满了洞。所以，既然瑞士奶酪里确实有洞......“

琼斯：非常有趣。但仿讽并不是一个反驳。

史密斯：好吧，这样吧。假设上帝从无中创造了一个宇宙，或者，依我更倾向于相信的，它是无因地出现的。这个宇宙只存在了一天，然后就完全消失了。如果真的有 "一周中的第几天"，那么这一天会是星期几？

琼斯：有两点。第一：我不确定”作为（某个具体的）星期几“是不是一段时间的固有属性（intrinsic property）。事实上，我怀疑这一点。就算假设它是，为什么它是某个特定的星期几这件事不能只是一个关于一段时间的偶然事实（contingent fact）呢？也许有许多可能的世界符合你的描述，有些是彼此内在物理的副本。也许 "是星期天 "是一个非物理的、非随附（non-supervenient）的属性，在其中一些世界中被实例化（instantiated）了，而在另一些世界中则没有。也许上帝只是各个任意选择一周中的某一天，作为那些世界中那一天的“星期几”。同样，我也对此表示怀疑，但我不认为这在概念上是不一致的。第二：假设——我认为这更有可能——”是星期几“是随附于，或者是为我们某些具体的社会实践/习俗所构建的。在这种情况下，是一周的哪一天——如果有这东西的话——取决于你的设想中的短暂的宇宙中是否有人存在。如果有，而且他们有相关的社会实践/习俗的虚假记忆，那么那一天是一周中的哪一天将由他们的虚假记忆的内容决定，同时也由他们在那一天所做的事情决定--比如说，他们在日历上标记了哪一天。我认为，你的思想实验看起来像是对我构成了一个问题只是因为你对宇宙的描述还不够具体而已。

史密斯：哇，你真的在认真对待这个问题！好吧，我也来玩玩。让我们假设真的有“星期几”。但这并不意味着某一天--星期日或星期一--是一周的第一天是一个事实。任一组的任何一个都可以是第一，或第二，或第三......或是任一种排序。但你似乎认为星期天 "客观上 "是一周的第一天。而我想知道的是，你认为是什么让周日而不是周一--或者其他任何一天--真正成为一周的第一天。

琼斯：星期天是第一天这件事背后一定要有什么东西吗？也许就只是这样而已，别无其它"解释总是要有一个尽头的"。但我的确认为有一个解释。正如我之前所说，我认为“是星期几”是由社会习俗决定的。那为什么它不能同时决定哪一天是第一天呢？

史密斯：社会习俗可能可以决定它，如果它能首先决定在这种情况下“第一”是什么的话。

琼斯。我认为它可以。只要'第一'，或一些相当的词已经被使用，我们就可以说某一天是一周的第一天，如果一个人的社会的大多数其他成员，理解这个他们都正参与其中的社会惯例，同意把它称为“一周的第一天”的话。鉴于我已经假设'第一'这个词已经是有意义的，我这说法不是循环的。

史密斯：是的，不是循环的，但不一定就没有争议。 让我们变得“中世纪”一些，做一些区分。把周日是一周的第一天的观点--或者说至少表面上看起来是这样的的观点--称为 "周日主义"，而把（表面）对立的观点称为 "周一主义"。现在，我们可以区分每种观点的两个版本。“强周日主义”是指持“周日本质上（essentially）是一周的第一天”的观点，而“弱周日主义”是说周日只是偶然地成为一周中的第一天。相应地，我们也有强周一主义和弱周一主义……

谈话持续了相当长的一段时间。当它最终结束时，我的对应体在离开的同时感到很荣幸听到了这场他觉得（而且也正是如此）是他那个时代伟大形而上学辩论之一的起头。对一些人来说，周日主义者、周一主义者和他们的反实在论批评者之间的争论似乎是无休止的，不切实际的，或者至少是有点奇怪的。但参与其中的哲学家们却安之若素，因为他们坚信，他们为人类知识的发展做出了微小但重要的贡献，从而尽了自己的一份力量。


The Nature of Analytic Metaphysics
Jason Zarri


As he was leaving a philosophy conference in a nearby possible world, one of my counterparts overheard the following conversation:


Smith: Great job on your presentation on the problem of the many! You almost convinced me to give up on multipleism.

Jones: Glad to hear it! How many of you did I almost convince?

Smith: Ha-ha. Well, anyhow, I hope you have a good weekend!

Jones: (Chuckles to himself)

Smith: What’s so funny?

Jones: Uhh…nothing.

Smith: C’mon, out with it.

Jones: Well, I never thought about it before, but it just occurred to me that we call Saturday and Sunday ‘the weekend’ when Sunday is really the first day of the week. It’s a little incongruous to count the first day of the week as a part of its end, isn’t it?

Smith: Hmm…that’s interesting. I guess I always thought of Monday as the first day of the week.

Jones: Ah, a clash of intuitions! How…usual—for us, anyway. Perhaps I think Sunday is the first day of the week because I’m Anglican, and you think Monday is because you’re agnostic?

Smith: Wait a minute…“intuitions”? Are you saying you’re a realist about “days of the week”?

Jones: Well, yes. Why wouldn’t I be? After all, today is Friday, right? And Friday is a day of the week. So, since it’s true that today is Friday…

Smith: A semantic argument? Really? Next thing you know you’ll be telling me you think holes exist too! “After all, Swiss cheese is full of holes. So, since it’s true that Swiss cheese has holes in it…”

Jones: Very funny. But a parody isn’t a counterargument.

Smith: Ok, how about this: Suppose God creates a universe out of nothing—or, as I would be more inclined to believe, that it springs into existence uncaused—lasts for a single day, and then completely vanishes. If there truly are “days of the week,” what day of the week would it have been?

Jones: Two points. First: I’m not sure that being (some particular) day of the week is an intrinsic property of a span of time. In fact, I doubt it. But let’s pretend it is. Why couldn’t it just be a contingent fact about a span of time that it’s a certain day of the week? There may be many possible worlds that answer to your description, some being intrinsic physical duplicates of each other. Maybe being Sunday, for example, is a non-physical, non-supervenient property that is instantiated in some of these worlds and not others. Maybe God just chooses at random what day of the week to make it in those worlds. Again, I doubt it, but I don’t think it’s conceptually incoherent. Second: Suppose, as I take to be more probable, that what day of the week it is is supervenient on, or constituted by, certain of our social practices. In that case, what day of the week it is—if any—would in your scenario depend on whether there are people around in your short-lived universe. If there are, and they had false memories which concerned the appropriate social practices, what day of the week it was would be determined by the content of their false memories, and also by what they did during that one day—which days they marked on their calendars, for instance. Your thought experiment, I think, only seems to pose a problem for me because your description of the universe is under-specified.

Smith: Wow, you’re really taking this seriously! Ok, I’ll play along. Let’s say there really are days of the week. It still doesn’t follow that there’s a fact of the matter about which day—Sunday or Monday—is the first day of the week. Any member of any group can be the first, or second, or third…on an arbitrary ordering. But you seem to think that Sunday is “objectively” the first day of the week. And what I’d like to know is what you think it is that makes it true that Sunday, rather than Monday—or any other day—is really the first day of the week.

Jones: Does something have to make it true that Sunday’s the first day? Maybe it just is! “Explanations come to an end somewhere.” But as it turns out I do think there’s an account to be had: As I said before, I think that what day of the week it is is determined by social convention. Why then couldn’t it also determine which day is the first?

Smith: Social convention might determine it, if it could first determine what being first comes to in this context.

Jones: I think it can. As long as ‘first’, or some equivalent word, is already in use, we can say that a day is the first day of the week iff most other members of one’s society, understanding that they are participating in a social convention, agree to call it ‘the first day of the week’. Given my supposition that the word ‘first’ is already meaningful, my account is non-circular.

Smith: Non-circular, but maybe not non-contentious.  Let’s “get medieval” and make some distinctions. Call the view—or the apparent view—that Sunday is the first day of the week ‘Sundayism,’ and the (apparently) rival view ‘Mondayism.’ Now, we can distinguish two versions of each view. ‘Strong Sundayism’ is the view that Sunday is essentially the first day of the week, and ‘weak Sundayism’ is the view that it is only contingently the first. Correspondingly, we also have strong Mondayism and weak Mondayism…

…

The conversation continued for quite some time. When it was finally over, my counterpart left feeling privileged to have overheard what he rightly suspected to be the beginning of one of the great metaphysical debates of his time. To some the dispute between Sundayists, Mondayists, and their anti-realist critics seemed interminable, impractical, or at least a bit odd. But the philosophers who were involved rested easy, secure in their conviction that they were doing their part by making a small but important contribution to the advancement of human knowledge.