


The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle



10 



Magic Touch 
* 
Death in the Bathtub 
* 
Messenger with Keepsakes 




We had moved into our present house in the autumn of the second year we were 
married. The Koenji apartment we had lived in until then was slated for renovation. We 
looked for a cheap, convenient apartment to move into, but finding such a place was not 
easy with our budget. When he heard this, my uncle suggested that we move into a house 
he owned in Setagaya. He had bought it in his youth and lived there for ten years. He 
wanted to tear the old place down and put up something more functional, but 
architectural regulations prevented him from building the kind of house he wanted. He 
was waiting for a rumored relaxation of the rules to take effect, but if he left the place 
vacant in the meantime, he would have to pay the property taxes, and if he rented it to 
strangers, there could be trouble when he asked them to vacate. From us, he would take 
only a nominal rent to cover the taxes, but in return he wanted us to agree to give up the 
place with three months' notice when the time came. We had no problem with that: the 
part about the taxes was not entirely clear to us, but we jumped at the chance to live in a 
real house, if only for a little while, paying the kind of rent we had been paying to live in 
an apartment (and a very cheap apartment at that). The house was pretty far from the 
nearest station on the Odakyu Line, but it was in a quiet residential neighborhood, and it 
had its own small yard. Even though it didn't belong to us, it gave us the feeling, once we 
moved in, that we were now part of a real "household." 
My mother's younger brother, this uncle of mine never made any demands on us. He 
was kind of a cool guy, I suppose, but there was something almost uncanny about him in 
the way he left us alone. Still, he was my favorite relative. He had graduated fro m a 
college in Tokyo and gone to work as a radio announcer, but when he got "sick of the 
work" after ten years, he quit the station and opened a bar on the Ginza. It was an almost 
austere little place, but it became widely known for the authenticity of its cocktails, and 
within a few years my uncle was running a string of bars and restaurants. Every one of 
his establishments did extremely well: apparently, he had that special spark you need for 
business. Once, while I was still in college, I asked him why every place he opened was 
such a success. In the very same location where one restaurant had failed on the Ginza, he 
might open up the same kind of restaurant and do just fine. Why was that? He held the 
palms of both hands out for me to see. "It's my magic touch," he said, without a hint of 
humor. And that was all he said. 
Maybe he really did have a "magic touch," but he also had a talent for finding capable 
people to work for him. He paid them high salaries and treated them well, and they in 
turn worked hard for him. "When I know I've got the right guy, I put a wad of bills in his 
hand and let him do his thing," he once told me. "You've got to spend your money for the 
things that money can buy, not worry about profit or loss. Save your energy for the things 
that money can't buy." 
He married late in life. Only after he had achieved financial success in his mid-forties 
did he settle down. His wife was a divorcee, three or four years his junior, and she 
brought her own considerable assets to the mar riage. My uncle never told me how he 
happened to meet her, and all I could tell about her was that she was a quiet sort of 
woman of good back ground. They had no children. She had apparently had no children 
with her first husband, either, which may have been the reason for the divorce. In any 
case, though not exactly a rich man, my uncle was in a position in his mid- forties where it 

was no longer necessary for him to break his back for money. In addition to the profits 
from his restaurants and bars, he had rental income from several houses and condos that 
he owned, plus steady dividend income from investments. With its reputation for 
respectable businesses and modest lifestyles, the family tended to see my uncle as 
something of a black sheep, and he had never shown much inclination for consorting with 
relatives. As his only nephew, though, I had always been of some concern to him, 
especially after my mother died the year I entered college and I had a falling-out with my 
father, who remarried. When I was living the lonely life of a poor college student in 
Tokyo, my uncle often treated me to dinner in one or another of his Ginza restaurants. 
He and his wife now lived in a condo on a hill in Azabu rather than be bothered with 
taking care of a house. He was not given to in dulging in luxuries, but he did have one 
hobby, which was the purchase of rare automobiles. He kept a Jaguar and an Alfa Romeo 
in the garage, both of them nearly antiques and extremely well cared for, as shiny as 
newborn babes. 



On the phone with my unc le about something else, I took the opportunity to ask him 
what he knew about May Kasahara's family. 
"Kasahara, you say?" He took a moment to think. "Never heard of them. I was a 
bachelor when I lived there, never had anything to do with the neighbors." 
"Actually, it's the house opposite theirs I'm curious about, the vacant house on the 
other side of the alley from their backyard," I said. "I guess somebody named Miyawaki 
used to live there. Now it's all boarded up." 
"Oh, Miyawaki. Sure, I knew him," said my uncle. "He used to own a few 
restaurants. Had one on the Ginza too. I met him professionally a few times. His places 
were nothing much, tell you the truth, but he had good locations. I thought he was doing 
all right. He was a nice guy, but kind of a spoiled -rich- kid type. He had never had to 
work hard, or he just never got the hang of it or something, but he never quite grew up. 
Somebody got him going on the stock market, took him for everything he had- house, 
land, businesses, everything. And the timing couldn't have been worse. He was trying to 
open a new place, had his house and land up as collateral. Bang! The whole thing. Had a 
couple of daughters, I think, college age." 
"The house has been empty ever since, I guess." 
"No kidding? I'll bet the title's a mess and his assets have been frozen or something. 
You'd better not touch that place, no matter what kind of bargain they're offering you." 
"Who? Me?" I laughed. "I could never afford a place like that. But what do you 
mean?" 
"I looked into that house when I bought mine. There's something wrong with it." 
"You mean like ghosts?" 
"Maybe not ghosts, but I've never heard anything good about the place," my uncle 
said. "Some fairly well- known army guy lived there till the end of the war, Colonel 
Somebody- or-other, a real superelite officer. The troops under his command in North 
China won all kinds of decorations, but they did some terrible things there-executing five 
hundred POWs, forcing tens of thousands of farmers to work for them until half of them 
dropped dead, stuff like that. These are the stories that were going around, so I don't 

know how much is true. He was called home just before the end of the war, so he was 
here for the surrender, and he could see from what was going on that he was likely to be 
tried as a war criminal. The guys who had gone crazy in China-the generals, the field 
offi cers-were being dragged away by the MPs. Well, he had no intention of being put on 
trial. He was not going to be made a spectacle of and hanged in the bargain. He preferred 
to take his own life rather than let that hap pen. So one day when he saw a GI stop a jeep 
in front of his house, he blew his brains out on the spot. He would have preferred to slit 
his stomach open the old - fashioned samurai way, but there was no time for that. His wife 
hanged herself in the kitchen to 'accompany' her husband in death." 
"Wow." 
"Anyhow, it turned out the GI was just an ordinary GI, looking for his girlfriend. He 
was lost. He wanted to ask somebody directions. You know how tough it is to find your 
way around that place. Deciding it's your time to die- that can't be easy for anybody. " 
"No, it can't be." 
"The house was vacant for a while after that, until an actress bought it- a movie 
actress. You wouldn' t know her name. She was around long before your time, and she 
was never very famous. She lived there, say, ten years or so. Just she and her maid. She 
was single. A few years after she moved in, she contracted some eye disease. Everything 
looked cloudy to her, even close up. But she was an actress, after all; she couldn't work 
with glasses on. And contact lenses were a new thing back then. They weren't very good 
and almost nobody used them. So before the crew shot a scene, she would always go over 
the layout and memorize how many steps she had to take from A to B. She managed one 
way or another: they were pretty simple films, those old Shochiku domestic dramas. 
Everything was more relaxed in those days. Then one day, after she had checked over the 
set and gone back to her dressing room, a young cameraman who didn't know what was 
going on moved the props and things just a little bit." 
"Uh-oh." 
"She missed her footing, fell over, and couldn't walk after that. And her vision started 
getting even worse. She was practically blind. It was a shame; she was still young and 
pretty. Of course her movie- making days were over. All she could do was stay at home. 
And then the maid took all her money and ran off with some guy. This maid was the one 
person she knew she could trust, depended on her for everything, and the woman took her 
savings, her stocks, everything. Boy, talk about terrible stories! So what do you think she 
did?" 
"Well, obviously this story can't have a bright, happy ending." 
"No, obviously," said my uncle. "She filled the tub, stuck her face in, and drowned 
herself. You realize, of course, that to die that way, you have to be pretty damned 
determined." 
"Nothing bright and happy about that." 
"No, nothing bright and happy. Miyawaki bought the property soon afterward. I 
mean, it's a nice place; everybody wants it when they see it. The neighborhood is 
pleasant, the plot is on high ground and gets good sunlight, the lot is big. But Miyawaki 
had heard the dark stories about the people who had lived there, so he had the whole 
thing torn down, foundation and all, and put up a new house. He even had Shinto priests 
come in to do a purification. But that wasn't enough, I guess. Bad things hap pen to 
anybody who lives there. It's just one of those pieces of land. They exist, that's all. I 

wouldn't take it if they gave it to me." 



After shopping at the supermarket, I organized my ingredients for mak ing dinner. I 
then took in the laundry, folded it neatly, and put it away. Back in the kitchen, I made 
myself a pot of coffee. This was a nice, quiet day, without calls from anybody. I stretched 
out on the sofa and read a book. There was no one to disturb my reading. Every once in a 
while, the wind -up bird would creak in the backyard. It was virtually the only sound I 
heard all day. 
Someone rang the front doorbell at four o'clock. It was the postman. "Registered 
mail," he said, and handed me a thick envelope. I took it and put my seal on the receipt. 
This was no ordinary envelope. It was made of old - fashioned heavy rice paper, and 
someone had gone to the trouble of writing my name and address on it with a brush, in 
bold black characters. The sender's name on the back was Tokutaro Mamiya, the address 
somewhere in Hiroshima Prefecture. I had absolutely no knowledge of either. J udging 
from the brushwork, this Tokutaro Mamiya was a man of advanced age. No one knew 
how to write like that anymore. 
I sat on the sofa and used a scissors to cut the envelope open. The letter itself, just as 
old- fashioned as the envelope, was written on rolled rice paper in a flowing hand by an 
obviously cultivated person. Lacking such cultivation myself, I could hardly read it. The 
sentence style matched the handwriting in its extreme formality, which only complicated 
the process, but with enough time, I managed to decipher the general meaning. It said that 
old Mr. Honda, the fortune-teller whom Kumiko and I had gone to see so long ago, had 
died of a heart attack two weeks earlier in his Meguro home. Living alone, he had died 
without company, but the doctors believed that he had gone quickly and without a great 
deal of suffering- perhaps the one bright spot in this sad tale. The maid had found him in 
the morning, slumped forward on the low table of his foot warmer. The letter writer, 
Tokutaro Mamiya, had been stationed in Manchuria as a first lieutenant and had chanced 
to share the dangers of war with Corporal Oishi Honda. Now, in compliance with the 
strong wishes of the deceased, and in the absence of surviving relatives, Mamiya had 
undertaken the task o f distributing the keepsakes. The deceased had left behind extremely 
minute written instructions in this regard. "The de tailed and meticulous will suggests that 
Mr. Honda had anticipated his own impending death. It states explicitly that he would be 
extremely pleased if you, Mr. Toru Okada, would be so kind as to receive a certain item 
as a remembrance of him. I can imagine how very busy you must be, Mr. Okada, but I 
can assure you, as an old comrade in arms of the deceased with few years to look forward 
to myself, that I could have no greater joy than if you were indeed to be so kind as to 
receive this item as a small remembrance of the late Mr. Honda." The letter concluded 
with the address at which Mr. Mamiya was presently staying in Tokyo, care of someo ne 
else named Mamiya in Hongo 2-chome, Bunkyo Ward. I imagined he must be in the 
house of a relative. 
I wrote my reply at the kitchen table. I had hoped to keep the postcard short and 
simple, but once I had pen in hand, those few concise phrases were not forthcoming. "I 
was fortunate enough to have known the late Mr. Honda and benefited from our brief 
acquaintance. The news that he is no longer living brings back memories of those times. 

Our ages were very different, of course, and our association lasted but a single year, yet- 
I always used to feel that there was something about the deceased that moved people 
deeply. To be quite honest, I would never have imagined that Mr. Honda would name me 
specifically to be the recipient of a keep sake, nor am I certain that I am even qualified to 
receive anything from him, but if such was his wish, then I will certainly do so with all 
due respect. Please contact me at your earliest convenience." 
When I dropped the card into the nearest mailbox, I found myself murmuring old Mr. 
Honda's verse: "Dying is the only way / For you to float free: / Nomonhan." 



It was close to ten before Kumiko came home from work. She had called before six to 
say that she would be late again today, that I should have dinner without her and she 
would grab something outside. Fine, I said, and ate a simple meal. Again I stayed home 
alone, reading a book. When she came in, Kumiko said she wanted a few sips of beer. 
We shared a mid size bottle. She looked tired. Elbows on the kitchen table, she rested her 
chin in her hands and said little when I spoke to her. She seemed preoccupied. I told her 
that Mr. Honda had died. "Oh, really?" she said, with a sigh. "Oh, well, he was getting on 
in years, and he was almost deaf." When I said that he had left a keepsake for me, though, 
she was shocked, as if something had suddenly fallen out of the sky. 
"For you?!" she exclaimed, her eyebrows twisting into a frown. 
"Yeah. Weird, isn't it?" 
"He must have liked you." 
"How could that be? I never really talked to the guy," I said. "At least I never said 
much. And even if I did, he couldn't hear anything. We used to sit and listen to his stories 
once a month. And all we ever heard from him was the Battle of Nomonhan: how they 
threw Molotov cocktails, and which tank burned, and which tank didn't burn, that kind of 
stuff." 
"Don't ask me," said Kumiko. "He must have liked something about you. I don't 
understand people like that, what's in their minds." 
After that, she went silent again. It was a strained silence. I glanced at the calendar on 
the wall. Her period was not due yet. I imagined that something unpleasant might have 
happened at the office. 
"Working too hard?" I asked. 
"A little," Kumiko said, a fter taking a sip of beer and staring at what was left in her 
glass. There was an almost defiant tone in her voice. "Sorry I was so late, but you know 
how it is with magazine work when we get busy. And it's not as if I do this all the time. I 
get them to give me less overtime than most. They know I have a husband to go home 
to." 
I nodded. "I'm not blaming you," I said. "I know you have to work late sometimes. I 
was just worried you're letting yourself get tired out." 
She took a long shower. I drank my beer and flipped through a weekly magazine that 
she had brought home. 
I shoved my hand in my pants pocket and found the pay there from my recent little 
part -time job. I hadn't even taken the cash from the envelope. Another thing I hadn't 
done was tell Kumiko about the job. Not that I had been hiding it from her, but I had let 

the opportunity to mention it slip by and there had never been another one. As time 
passed, I found it harder to bring up the subject, for some strange reason. All I would 
have had to say was, "I met this odd sixteen-year -old girl from down the street and took a 
job with her doing a survey for a wig maker. The pay was pretty good too." 
And Kumiko could have said, "Oh, really? Isn't that nice," and that might have been 
the end of it. Or not. She might have wanted to know more about May Kasahara. She 
might have been bothered that I was making friends with a sixteen- year-old girl. Then I 
would have had to tell her about May Kasahara and explain in detail where, when, and 
how we happened to meet. But I'm not very good at giving people orderly explanations 
of things. 
I took the money from the envelope and put it in my wallet. The envelope itself I 
crumpled and threw in the wastebasket. So this was how secrets got started, I thought to 
myself. People constructed them little by little. I had not consciously intended to keep 
May Kasahara a secret from Kumiko. My relationship with her was not that big a deal, 
finally: whether I mentioned it or not was of no consequence. Once it had flowed down a 
certain delicate channel, however, it had become cloaked in the opacity of secretiveness, 
whatever my original "intention" may have been. The same thing had happened with 
Creta Kano. I had told Kumiko that Malta Kano's younger sister had come to the house, 
th at her name was Creta, that she dressed in early- sixties style, that she took samples of 
our tap water. But I had remained silent on the fact that she had afterward begun to make 
startling revelations to me and had vanished without a word before reaching the end. 
Creta Kano's story had been too far-out: I could never have re-created the nuances and 
conveyed them to Kumiko, and so I had not tried. Or then again, Kumiko might have 
been less than pleased that Creta Kano had stayed here long after her business was 
through and made all kinds of troubling personal confessions to me. And so that became 
another one of my little secrets. 
Maybe Kumiko had the same kind of secrets that she was keeping from me. With my 
own fund of secrets, I was in no position to blame her if she did, of course. Between the 
two of us, I was surely the more secretive. She tended to say what she was thinking. She 
was the type of per son who thought things out while speaking. I was not like that. 
Uneasy with these ruminations, I walked toward the bathroom. The door was wide 
open. I stood in the doorway and looked at Kumiko from behind. She had changed into 
solid - blue pajamas and was standing in front of the mirror, drying her hair with a towel. 
"About a job for me," I said. "I have been t hinking about it. I've asked friends to be 
on the lookout, and I've tried a few places myself. There are jobs out there, so I can work 
anytime I decide to work. I can start tomorrow if I make up my mind to it. It's making up 
my mind that's hard. I'm just not sure. I'm not sure if it's OK for me to pick a job out of 
a hat like that." 
"That's why I keep telling you to do what you want," she said, while looking at 
herself in the mirror. "You don't have to find a job right away. If you're worried about 
the economics of it, you don't have to worry. If it makes you uneasy not to have a job, if 
it's a burden to you to have me be the only one working outside the house while you stay 
home and take care of the housework, then take some job-any job-for a while. I don' t 
care." 
"Of course, I'll have to find a job eventually. I know that, you know that. I can't go 
on hanging around like this forever. And I will find a job sooner or later. It's just that 

right now, I don't know what kind of a job I should take. For a while after I quit, I just 
figured I'd take some other law- related job. I do have connections in the field. But now I 
can't get myself into that mood. The more time that goes by, the less interest I have in 
law. I feel more and more that it's simply not the work for me." 
Kumiko looked at me in the mirror. I went on: 
"But knowing what I don't want to do doesn't help me figure out what I do want to 
do. I could do just about anything if somebody made me. But I don't have an image of 
the one thing I really want to do. That's my problem now. I can't find the image." 
"So, then," she said, putting her towel down and turning to face me, "if you're tired of 
law, don't do it anymore. Just forget about the bar exam. Don't get all worked up about 
finding a job. If you can't find the image, wait until it forms by itself. What's wrong with 
that?" 
I nodded. "I just wanted to make sure I had explained to you exactly how I felt." 
"Good," she said. 
I went to the kitchen and washed my glass. She came in from the bathroom and sat at 
the kitchen table. 
"Guess who called me this afternoon," she said. "My brother." 
"Oh?" 
"He's thinking of running for office. In fact, he's just about decided to do it." 
"Running for office?!" This came as such a shock to me, I could hardly speak for a 
moment. "You mean ... for the Diet?" 
"That's right. They're asking him to run for my uncle's seat in Niigata." 
"I thought it was all set for your uncle's son to succeed him. He was going to resign 
his directorship at Dentsu or something and go back to Niigata." 
She started cleaning her ears with a cotton swab. "That was the plan, but my cousin 
doesn't want to do it. He's got his family in Tokyo, and he enjoys his work. He's not 
ready to give up such an important post with the world's largest advertising firm and 
move back to the wilds of Niigata just to become a Diet member. The main opposition is 
from his wife. She doesn't want him sacrificing the family to run for office." 
The elder brother of Kumiko's father had spent four or five terms in the Lower 
House, representing that electoral district in Niigata. While not exactly a heavyweight, he 
had compiled a fairly impressive record, rising at one point to a minor cabinet post. Now, 
however, advanced age and heart disease would make it impossible for him to enter the 
next election, which meant that someone would have to succeed to his constituency. This 
uncle had two sons, but the elder had never intended to go into politics, and so the 
younger was the obvious choice. 
"Now the people in the district are dying to have my brother run. They want 
somebody young and smart and energetic. Somebody who can serve for several terms, 
with the talent to become a major power in the central government. My brother has the 
name recognition, he'll attract the young vote: he's pe rfect. True, he can't schmooze with 
the locals, but the support organization is strong, and they'll take care of that. Plus, if he 
wants to go on living in Tokyo, that's no problem. All he has to do is show up for the 
election." 
I had trouble picturing Noboru Wataya as a Diet member. "What do you think of all 
this?" I asked. 
"He's got nothing to do with me. He can become a Diet member or an astronaut, for 

all I care." 
"But why did he make a point of coming to you for advice?" 
"Don't be ridiculous," she said, with a dry voice. "He wasn't asking my advice. You 
know he'd never do that. He was just keeping me in formed. As a member of the family." 
"I see," I said. "Still, if he's going to run for the Diet, won't it be a problem that he's 
divorced and single?" 
"I wonder," said Kumiko. "I don't know anything about politics or elections or 
anything. They just don't interest me. But anyway, I'm pretty sure he'll never get married 
again. To anybody. He should never have gotten married in the first place. That's not 
what he wants out of life. He's after something else, something completely different from 
what you or I want. I know that for sure." 
"Oh, really?" 
Kumiko wrapped two used cotton swabs in a tissue and threw them in the 
wastebasket. Then she raised her face and looked straight at me. "I once saw him 
masturbating. I opened a door, and there he was." 
"So what? Everybody masturbates," I said. 
"No, you don't understand," she said. Then she sighed. "It happened maybe two years 
after my sister died. He was probably in college, and I was something like a third grader. 
My mother had wavered between getting rid of my sister's things and putting them away, 
and in the end she decided to keep them, thinking I might wear them when I got older. 
She had put them in a carton in a closet. My brother had taken them out and was smelling 
them and doing it." I kept silent. 
"I was just a little girl then. I didn't know anything about sex. I really didn't know 
what he was doing, but I could tell that it was something twisted, something I wasn't 
supposed to see, something much deeper than,it appeared on the surface." Kumiko shook 
her head. 
"Does Noboru Wataya know you saw him?" 
"Of course. We looked right into each other's eyes." I nodded. 
"And how about your sister's clothes?" I asked. "Did you wear them when you got 
bigger?" "No way," she said. 
"So you think he was in love with your sister?" "I wonder," said Kumiko. "I'm not 
even sure he had a sexual interest in her, but he certainly had something, and I suspect 
he's never been able to get away from that something. That's what I mean when I say he 
should never have gotten married in the first place." 
Kumiko fell silent. For a long time, neither of us said anything. Then she spoke first. 
"In that sense, I think he may have some serious psychological problems. Of course, we 
all have psychological problems to some extent, but his are a lot worse than whatever you 
or I might have. They're a lot deeper and more persistent. And he has no intention of let-
ting these scars or weaknesses or whatever they are be seen by anybody else. Ever. Do 
you understand what I'm saying? This election coming up: it worries me." 
"Worries you? How's that?" 
"I don't know. It just does," she said. "Anyhow, I'm tired. I can't think anymore 
today. Let's go to bed." 
Brushing my teeth in the bathroom, I studied my face in the mirror. For over two 
months now, since quitting my job, I had rarely entered the "outside world." I had been 
moving back and forth between the neigh borhood shops, the ward pool, and this house. 

Aside from the Ginza and that hotel in Shinagawa, the farthest point I had traveled from 
home was the cleaner's by the station. And in all that time, I had hardly seen anyone. 
Aside from Kumiko, the only people I could be said to have "seen" in two months were 
Malta and Kano and May Kasahara. It was a narrow world, a world that was standing 
still. But the narrower it became, and the more it betook of stillness, the more this world 
that enveloped me seemed to overflow with things and people that could only be called 
strange. They had been there all the while, it seemed, waiting in the shadows for me to 
stop moving. And every time the wind- up bird came to my yard to wind its spring, the 
world descended more deeply into chaos. 
I rinsed my mouth and went on looking at my face for a time. 
I can't find the image, I said to myself. I'm thirty, I'm standing still, and I can't find 
the image. 
When I went from the bathroom to the bedroom, Kumiko was asleep. 
¡¡
