


The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle



7 



Recollections and Dialogue on Pregnancy 
* 
Empirical Inquiry on Pain 



When I woke, the half-moon mouth of the well had taken on the deep blue of evening. 
The hands of my watch showed seven-thirty. Seven-thirty p.m. Meaning I had been asleep 
down here for four and a half hours. 
The air at the bottom of the well felt chilly. There had probably been too much nervous 
excitement involved for me to think about air temperature when I first climbed down. Now, 
though, my skin was reacting to the cold air. Rubbing my bare arms to warm them, I realized I 
should have brought something in the knapsack to put on over my T-shirt. It had never 
crossed my mind that the temperature in the bottom of the well might be different from the 
temperature at the surface. 
Now I was enveloped by a darkness that was total. No amount of straining helped my eyes 
to see a thing. I couldn't tell where my own hand was. I felt along the wall to where the ladder 
hung and gave it a tug. It was still firmly anchored at the surface. The movement of my hand 
seemed to cause the darkness itself to shift, but that could have been an illusion. 
It felt extremely strange not to be able to see my own body with my own eyes, though I 
knew it must be there. Staying very still in the darkness, I became less and less convinced of 
the fact that I actually existed. 
To cope with that, I would clear my throat now and then, or run my hand over my face. 
That way, my ears could check on the existence of my voice, my hand could check on the 
existence of my face, and my face could check on the existence of my hand. 
Despite these efforts, my body began to lose its density and weight, like sand gradually 
being washed away by flowing water. I felt as if a fierce and wordless tug-of-war were going 
on inside me, a contest in which my mind was slowly dragging my body into its own territory. 
The darkness was disrupting the proper balance between the two. The thought struck me that 
my own body was a mere provisional husk that had been prepared for my mind by a 
rearrangement of the signs known as chromosomes. If the signs were rearranged yet again, I 
would find myself inside a wholly different body than before. "Prostitute of the mind," Creta 
Kano had called herself. I no longer had any trouble accepting the phrase. Yes, it was possible 
for us to couple in our minds and for me to come in reality. In truly deep darkness, all kinds of 
strange things were possible. 
I shook my head and struggled to bring my mind back inside my body. 
In the darkness, I pressed the fingertips of one hand against the fingertips of the other-


thumb against thumb, index finger against index finger. My right-hand fingers ascertained the 
existence of my left-hand fingers, and the fingers of my left hand ascertained the existence of 
the fingers of my right hand. Then I took several slow, deep breaths. OK, then, enough of this 
thinking about the mind. Think about reality. Think about the real world. The body's world. 
That's why I'm here. To think about reality. The best way to think about reality, I had 
decided, was to get as far away from it as possible-a place like the bottom of a well, for 
example. "When you're supposed to go down, find the deepest well and go down to the 
bottom," Mr. Honda had said. Leaning against the wall, I slowly sucked the moldy air into my 
lungs. 



We didn't have a wedding ceremony. We couldn't have afforded it, to begin with, and 
neither of us wanted to feel beholden to our parents. Beginning our life together, any way we 
could manage to do so, was far more important to us than a ceremony. We went to the ward 
office early one Sunday morning, woke the clerk on duty when we rang the bell at the Sunday 
window, and submitted a registration of marriage. Later, we went to the kind of high-class 
French restaurant that neither of us could usually afford, ordered a bottle of wine, and ate a 
full-course dinner. That was enough for us. 
At the time we married, we had practically no savings (my mother had left me a little 
money when she died, but I made a point of never touching it except for a genuine 
emergency) and no furniture to speak of. We had no future to speak of, either. Working at a 
law firm without an attorney's credentials, I had virtually nothing to look forward to, and 
Kumiko worked for a tiny, unknown publisher. If she had wanted to, she could have found a 
much better position through her father when she graduated, but she disliked the idea of going 
to him and instead found a job on her own. Neither of us was dissatisfied, though. We were 
pleased just to be able to survive without intrusion from anyone. 
It wasn't easy for the two of us to build something out of nothing. I had that tendency 
toward solitude common to only children. When trying to accomplish something serious, I 
liked to do it myself. Having to check things out with other people and get them to understand 
seemed to me a great waste of time and energy when it was a lot easier to work alone in 
silence. And Kumiko, after losing her sister, had closed her heart to her family and grown up 
as if alone. She never went to them for advice. In that sense, the two of us were very much 
alike. 
Still, little by little, the two of us learned to devote our bodies and minds to this newly 
created being we called "our home." We practiced thinking and feeling about things together. 
Things that happened to either of us individually we now strove to deal with together as 
something that belonged to both of us. Sometimes it worked, and sometimes it didn't. But we 
enjoyed the fresh, new process of trial and error. And even violent collisions we could forget 
about in each other's arms. 



In the third year of our marriage, Kumiko became pregnant. This was a great shock to us- 
or to me, at least-because of the extreme care we had been taking with contraception. A 
moment of carelessness must have done it; not that we could determine which exact moment 
it had been, but there was no other explanation. In any case, we simply could not afford the 
expense of a child. Kumiko had just gotten into the swing of her publishing job and, if 
possible, wanted to keep it. A small company like hers made no provision for anything so 
grand as maternity leave. A woman working there who wanted to have a child had no choice 
but to quit. If Kumiko had done that, we would have had to survive on my pay alone, for a 


while, at least, but this would have been a virtual impossibility. 
"I guess we'll have to pass, this time," Kumiko said to me in an expressionless voice the 
day the doctor gave her the news. 
She was probably right. No matter how you looked at it, that was the most sensible 
conclusion. We were young and totally unprepared for parenthood. Both Kumiko and I 
needed time for ourselves. We had to establish our own life: that was the first priority. We'd 
have plenty of opportunities for making children in the future. 



In fact, though, I did not want Kumiko to have an abortion. Once, in my second year of 
college, I had made a girl pregnant, someone I had met where I worked part time. She was a 
nice kid, a year younger than I, and we got along well. We liked each other, of course, but 
were by no means serious about each other, nor was there any possibility that we would ever 
become serious. We were just two lonely youngsters who needed someone to hold. 
About the reason for her pregnancy there was never any doubt. I always used a condom, 
but that one day I forgot to have one ready. I had run out. When I told her so, she hesitated for 
a few seconds and then said, "Oh, well, I think I'm OK today anyway." One time was all it 
took. 
I couldn't quite believe that I had "made a girl pregnant," but I did know that an abortion 
was the only way. I scraped the money together and went with her to the clinic. We took a 
commuter train way out to a little town in Chiba, where a friend of hers had put her in touch 
with a doctor. We got off at a station I had never heard of and saw thousands of tiny houses, 
all stamped out of the same mold, crowded together and stretching over the rolling hills to the 
horizon. These were huge new developments that had gone up in recent years for the younger 
company employees who could not afford housing in Tokyo. The station itself was brand-
new, and just across from it stretched huge, water-filled rice fields, bigger than any I had ever 
seen. The streets were lined with real estate signs. 
The clinic waiting room overflowed with huge-bellied young women, most of whom must 
have been in their fourth or fifth year of marriage and finally settling down to make children 
in their newly mortgaged suburban homes. The only young male in the place was me. The 
pregnant ladies all looked my way with the most intense interest-and no hint of goodwill. 
Anyone could see at a glance that I was a college student who had accidentally gotten his 
girlfriend pregnant and had come with her for an abortion. 
After the operation, the girl and I took the train back to Tokyo. Headed into the city in the 
late afternoon, the train was nearly empty. I apologized to her. My carelessness had gotten her 
into this mess, I said. 
"Don't take it so hard," she said. "At least you came with me to the clinic, and you paid 
for the operation." 
She and I soon stopped seeing each other, so I never knew what became of her, but for a 
very long time after the abortion-and even after we drifted apart-my feelings refused to settle 
down. Every time I recalled that day, the image would flash into my mind of the pregnant 
young women who filled the clinic waiting room to overflowing, their eyes so full of 
certainty. And the thought would strike me that I should never have gotten her pregnant. 
In the train on the way back, to comfort me-to comfort me-she told me all the details that 
had made the operation so easy. "It's not as bad as you're thinking," she said. "It doesn't take 
long, and it doesn't hurt. You just take your clothes off and lie there. Yeah, I suppose it's kind 
of embarrassing, but the doctor was nice, and so were the nurses. Of course, they did lecture 
me a little, said to be more careful from now on. So don't feel so bad. It's partly my fault too. 
I was the one who said it'd be OK. Right? Cheer up." 
All during the long train ride to the little town in Chiba, and all the way back again, 


though, I felt I had become a different person. Even after I had seen her home and returned to 
my room, to lie in bed and look at the ceiling, I could sense the change. I was a new me, and I 
could never go back to where I had been before. What was getting to me was the awareness 
that I was no longer innocent. This was not a moralistic sense of wrongdoing, or the workings 
of a guilty conscience. I knew that I had made a terrible mistake, but I was not punishing 
myself for it. It was a physical fact that I would have to confront coolly and logically, beyond 
any question of punishment. 



The first thing that came to mind when I heard that Kumiko was pregnant was the image 
of those pregnant young women who filled the clinic waiting room. Or rather, it was the 
special smell that seemed to hang in the air there. I had no idea what that smell had been-if it 
was the actual smell of something at all. Perhaps it had been something like a smell. When the 
nurse called her name, the girl slowly raised herself from the hard vinyl chair and walked 
straight for the door. Just before she stood up, she glanced at me with the hint of a smile on 
her lips-or what was left of a smile that she had changed her mind about. 
I knew that it was unrealistic for us to have a child, but I didn't want Kumiko to have an 
abortion, either. When I said this to her, she replied, 
"We've been through all this. If I have a baby now, that's the end of working for me, and 
you'll have to find a better-paying job to support me and the baby. We won't have money for 
anything extra. We won't be able to do anything we want to do. From now on, the realistic 
possibilities for us will be narrowed down to nothing. Is that OK with you?" 
"Yeah," I said. "I think it is OK with me." 
"Really?" 
"If I make up my mind to it, I can probably find work-with my uncle, say: he's looking for 
help. He wants to open up a new place, but he can't find anybody he can trust to run it. I'm 
sure I'd make a lot more with him than I'm making now. It's not a law firm, but so what? I'm 
not crazy about the work I'm doing now." 
"So you'd run a restaurant?" 
"I'm sure I could if I gave it a try. And in an emergency, I've got a little money my 
mother left me. We wouldn't starve to death." 
Kumiko fell silent and stayed that way, thinking, for a long time, making tiny wrinkles at 
the corners of her eyes. She had these little expressions that I liked. "Does this mean you want 
to have a baby?" she asked. 
"I don't know," I said. "I know you're pregnant, but it hasn't really hit me that I might 
become a father. And I don't really know how our life would change if we had a baby. You 
like your job, and it seems like a mistake to take that away from you. On the one hand, I think 
the two of us need more time with each other, but I also think that making a baby would 
expand our world. I don't know what's right. I've just got this feeling that I don't want you to 
have an abortion. So I can't make any guarantees. I'm not one hundred percent sure about any 
of this, and I don't have any amazing solutions. All I've got is this feeling." 
Kumiko thought about this for a while, rubbing her stomach every now and then. "Tell 
me," she said. "Why do you think I got pregnant? Nothing comes to mind?" 
I shook my head. "Not really. We've always been careful. This is just the kind of trouble I 
wanted to avoid. So I don't have any idea how it happened." 
"You think I might have had an affair? Haven't you thought about that possibility?" 
"Never." 
"Why not?" 
"I don't know. I can't claim a sixth sense or anything, but I'm sure of that much." 
We were sitting at the kitchen table, drinking wine. It was late at night id absolutely silent. 


Kumiko narrowed her eyes and stared at the last sip of wine in the bottom of her glass. She 
almost never drank, though she would have a glass of wine when she couldn't get to sleep. It 
always worked for her. I was just drinking to keep her company. We didn't have nything so 
sophisticated as real wineglasses. Instead, we were drinking from little beer glasses we got 
free at the neighborhood liquor store. 
"Did you have an affair?" I asked, suddenly concerned. 
Kumiko smiled and shook her head. "Don't be silly. You know I wouldn't do anything 
like that. I just brought it up as a theoretical possibility." Then she turned serious and put her 
elbows on the table. "Sometimes, though, I can't tell about things. I can't tell what's real and 
what's not real... what things really happened and what things didn't really happen.... Just 
sometimes, though." 
"Is this one of those sometimes?" 
"Well, sort of. Doesn't this kind of thing ever happen to you?" 
I thought about it for a minute. "Not that I can recall as a concrete example, no," I said. 
"How can I put this? There's a kind of gap between what I think is real and what's really 
real. I get this feeling like some kind of little something-ir-other is there, somewhere inside 
me ... like a burglar is in the house, hiding in a closet... and it comes out every once in a while 
and messes up whatever order or logic I've established for myself. The way a magnet can 
make a machine go crazy." 
"Some kind of little something-or-other? A burglar?" I said. "Wow, talk about vague!" 
"It is vague. Really," said Kumiko, then drank down the rest of her wine. 
I looked at her for a time. "And you think there's some kind of connection between that 
'some kind of little something-or-other' and the fact that you're pregnant?" 
She shook her head. "No, I'm not saying the two things are related or not related. It's just 
that sometimes I'm not really sure about the order of things. That's all I'm trying to say." 
There was a growing touch of impatience in her words. The moment had arrived to end 
this conversation. It was after one o'clock in the morning. I reached across the table and took 
her hand. 
"You know," said Kumiko, "I kind of wish you'd let me decide this for myself. I realize 
it's a big problem for both of us. I really do. But this one I want you to let me decide. I feel 
bad that I can't explain very well what I'm thinking and feeling." 
"Basically, I think the right to make the decision is yours," I said, "and I respect that 
right." 
"I think there's a month or so left to decide. We've been talking about this together all 
along now, and I think I have a pretty good idea how you feel about it. So now let me do the 
thinking. Let's stop talking about it for a while." 



I was in Hokkaido when Kumiko had the abortion. The firm never sent its lackeys out of 
town on business, but on that particular occasion no one else could go, so I ended up being the 
one sent north. I was supposed to deliver a briefcase stuffed with papers, give the other party a 
simple explanation, take delivery of their papers, and come straight home. The papers were 
too important to mail or entrust to some courier. Because all return flights to Tokyo were full, 
I would have to spend a night in a Sapporo business hotel. Kumiko went for the abortion that 
day, alone. She phoned me after ten at the hotel and said, "I had the operation this afternoon. 
Sorry to be informing you after the fact like this, but they had an opening on short notice, and 
I thought it would be easier on both of us if I made the decision and took care of it by myself 
while you were away." 
"Don't worry," I said. "Whatever you think is best." 
"I want to tell you more, but I can't do it yet. I think I'll have to tell you sometime." 


"We can talk when I get back." 
After the call, I put on my coat and went out to wander through the streets of Sapporo. It 
was still early March, and both sides of the roadways were lined with high mounds of snow. 
The air was almost painfully cold, and your breath would come out in white clouds that 
vanished in an instant. People wore heavy coats and gloves and scarves wrapped up to their 
chins and made their way down the icy sidewalks with careful steps. Taxis ran back and forth, 
their studded tires scratching at the road. When I couldn't stand the cold any longer, I stepped 
into a bar for a few quick straights and went out to walk some more. 
I stayed on the move for a very long time. Snow floated down every once in a while, but it 
was frail snow, like a memory fading into the distance. The second bar I visited was below 
street level. It turned out to be a much bigger place than the entrance suggested. There was a 
small stage next to the bar, and on it was a slim man with glasses, playing a guitar nd singing. 
He sat on a metal chair with his legs crossed, guitar case at his feet. 
I sat at the bar, drinking and half listening to the music. Between songs, the man explained 
that the music was all his own. In his late twenties, he had a face with no distinguishing 
characteristics, and he wore glasses with black plastic frames. His outfit consisted of jeans, 
high lace-up boots, and a checked flannel work shirt that hung loose around his waist. The 
type of music was hard to define-something that might have been called "folk" in the old 
days, though a Japanese version of folk. Simple chords, simple melodies, unremarkable 
words. Not the kind of stuff I'd go out of my way to listen to. 
Ordinarily, I wouldn't have paid any attention to music like that. I vould have had my 
whiskey, paid my bill, and left the place. But that light I was chilled, right to the bone, and 
had no intention of going outside again under any circumstances until I had warmed up all the 
way through. I drank one straight and ordered another. I made no attempt to remove my coat 
or my scarf. When the bartender asked if I wanted a snack, I ordered some cheese and ate a 
single slice. I tried to think, but I couldn't get my head to work right. I didn't even know what 
it was I wanted to think about. I was a vacant room. Inside, the music produced only a dry, 
hollow echo. 
When the man finished singing, there was scattered applause, neither overly enthusiastic 
nor entirely perfunctory. There were no more than ten or fifteen customers in the place. The 
fellow stood and bowed. He seemed to make some kind of funny remarks that caused a few of 
the customers to laugh. I called the bartender and ordered my third whiskey. Then, finally, I 
took off my coat and my scarf. 
"That concludes my show for tonight," announced the singer. He seemed'to pause and 
survey the room. "But there must be some of you here tonight who didn't like my songs. For 
you, I've got a little something extra. I don't do this all the time, so you should consider 
yourselves very lucky." 
He set his guitar on the floor and, from the guitar case, took a single thick white candle. 
He lit it with a match, dripped some wax into a plate, and stood the candle up. Then, looking 
like the Greek philosopher, he held the plate aloft. "Can I have the lights down, please?" One 
of the employees dimmed the lights somewhat. "A little darker, if you don't mind." Now the 
place became much darker, and the candle flame stood out clearly. Palms wrapped around my 
whiskey glass to warm it, I kept my eyes on the man and his candle. 
"As you are well aware," the man continued, his voice soft but penetrating, "in the course 
of life we experience many kinds of pain. Pains of the body and pains of the heart. I know I 
have experienced pain in many different forms in my life, and I'm sure you have too. In most 
cases, though, I'm sure you've found it very difficult to convey the truth of that pain to 
another person: to explain it in words. People say that only they themselves can understand 
the pain they are feeling. But is this true? I for one do not believe that it is. If, before our eyes, 
we see someone who is truly suffering, we do sometimes feel his suffering and pain as our 
own. This is the power of empathy. Am I making myself clear?" 


He broke off and looked around the room once again. 
"The reason that people sing songs for other people is because they want to have the 
power to arouse empathy, to break free of the narrow shell of the self and share their pain and 
joy with others. This is not an easy thing to do, of course. And so tonight, as a kind of 
experiment, I want you to experience a simpler, more physical kind of empathy." 
Everyone in the place was hushed now, all eyes fixed on the stage. Amid the silence, the 
man stared off into space, as if to insert a pause or to reach a state of mental concentration. 
Then, without a word, he held his left hand over the lighted candle. Little by little, he brought 
the palm closer and closer to the flame. Someone in the audience made a sound like a sigh or 
a moan. You could see the tip of the flame burning the man's palm. You could almost hear 
the sizzle of the flesh. A woman released a hard little scream. Everyone else just watched in 
frozen horror. The man endured the pain, his face distorted in agony. What the hell was this? 
Why did he have to do such a stupid, senseless thing? I felt my mouth going dry. After five or 
six seconds of this, he slowly removed his hand from the flame and set the dish with the 
candle in it on the floor. Then he clasped his hands together, the right and left palms pressed 
against each other. 
"As you have seen tonight, ladies and gentlemen, pain can actually burn a person's flesh," 
said the man. His voice sounded exactly as it had earlier: quiet, steady, cool. No trace of 
suffering remained on his face. Indeed, it had been replaced by a faint smile. "And the pain 
that must have been there, you have been able to feel as if it were your own. That is the power 
of empathy." 
The man slowly parted his clasped hands. From between them he produced a thin red 
scarf, which he opened for all to see. Then he stretched his palms out toward the audience. 
There were no burns at all. moment of silence followed, and then people expressed their relief 
in wild applause. The lights came up, and the chatter of voices replaced the tension that had 
filled the room. As if the whole thing had never happened, the man put his guitar into the 
case, stepped down from the age, and disappeared. 
When I paid my check, I asked the girl at the register if the man sang there often and 
whether he usually performed the trick. 
"I'm not sure," she said. "As far as I know, this was his first time here, never heard of him 
until today. And nobody told me he did magic tricks. Wasn't that amazing, though? I wonder 
how he does it. I bet he'd be a hit n TV." 
"It's true," I said. "It looked like he was really burning himself." 
I walked back to the hotel, and the minute I got into bed, sleep came over me as if it had 
been waiting all this time. As I drifted off, I thought of Kumiko, but she seemed very far 
away, and after that it was impossible for me to think of anything. Through my mind flashed 
the face of the man urning his palm. He really seemed to be burning himself, I thought. And 
then I fell asleep. 
