


The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle



2 





Waking from Hibernation 
* 
One More Name Card 
* 
The Namelessness of Money 



Just wanting the land was not going to make it mine, of course. The amount of money I 
could realistically raise was close to zero. I still had a little of what my mother had left me, 
but that would evaporate soon in the course of living. I had no job, nothing I could offer as 
collateral. And there was no bank in the world that would lend money to someone like me out 
of sheer kindness. I would have to use magic to produce the money from thin air. And soon. 
One morning I walked to the station and bought ten fifty-million-yen lottery tickets, with 
continuous numbers. Using tacks, I covered a section of the kitchen wall with them and 
looked at them every day. Sometimes I would spend a whole hour in a chair staring hard at 
them, as if waiting for a secret code to rise out of them that only I could see. After several 
days of this, the thought struck me from nowhere: I'm never going to win the lottery. 
Before long, I knew this without a doubt. Things were absolutely not going to be solved 
so easily-by just buying a few lottery tickets and waiting for the results. I would have to get 
the money through my own efforts. I tore up the lottery tickets and threw them away. Then I 
stood in front of the washbasin mirror and peered into its depths. There has to be a way, I said 
to myself in the mirror, but of course there was no reply. 
Tired of always being shut up in the house with my thoughts, I began to walk around the 
neighborhood. I continued these aimless walks for three or four days, and when I tired of the 
neighborhood, I took the train to Shinjuku. The impulse to go downtown came to me when I 
happened by the station. Sometimes, I thought, it helps to think about things in a different 
setting. It occurred to me, too, that I hadn't been on a train for a very long time. Indeed while 
putting my money in the ticket machine, I experienced the nervousness one feels when doing 
something unfamiliar. When had I last been to the streets of the city? Probably not since I fol-
lowed the man with the guitar case from the Shinjuku west entrance- more than six months 
earlier. 
The sight of the crowds in Shinjuku Station I found overwhelming. The flow of people 
took my breath away and even made my heart pound to some extent-and this wasn't even rush 
hour! I had trouble making my way through the crush of bodies at first. This was not so much 
a crowd as a raging torrent-the kind of flood that tears whole houses apart and sweeps them 
away. I had been walking only a few minutes when I felt the need to calm my nerves. I 
entered a cafe that faced the avenue and took a seat by one of its large glass windows. Late in 
the morning, the cafe was not crowded. I ordered a cup of cocoa and half-consciously 
watched the people walking by outside. 
I was all but unaware of the passage of time. Perhaps fifteen minutes had gone by, perhaps 
twenty, when I realized that my eyes had been following each polished Mercedes-Benz, 
Jaguar, and Porsche that crept along the jam-packed avenue. In the fresh morning sunlight 
after a night of rain, these cars sparkled with almost painful intensity, like some kind of 
symbols. They were absolutely spotless. Those guys have money. Such a thought had never 
crossed my mind before. I looked at my reflection in the glass and shook my head. This was 
the first time in my life I had a desperate need for money. 


When the lunchtime crowd began to fill the cafe, I decided to take a walk. I had no 
particular goal other than to walk through the city I had not seen for so long. I walked from 
one street to another, my only thought being to avoid bumping into the people coming toward 
me. I turned right or left or went straight ahead, depending on the changing of the traffic 
signals or the whim of the moment. Hands in pockets, I concentrated on the physical act of 
walking-from the avenues with their rows of department stores and display windows, to the 
back alleys with their garishly decorated porno shops, to the lively streets with movie theaters, 
through the hushed precincts of a Shinto shrine, and back to the avenues. It was a warm 
afternoon, and close to half the crowd had left their coats indoors. The occasional breeze felt 
pleasant for a change. Before I realized it, I found myself standing in familiar surroundings. I 
looked at the tiles beneath my feet, at the little sculpture that stood there, and at the tall glass 
building that towered over me. I was standing in the middle of the small plaza outside the 
high-rise, the very one where I had gone last summer to watch the people passing by, as my 
uncle had advised me to do. I had kept it up for eleven days then, at the end of which I had 
followed the weird man with the guitar case into the strange apartment house lobby, where he 
attacked me with the bat. Aimless walking around Shinjuku had brought me to the same exact 
place. 
As before, I bought myself coffee and a doughnut at Dunkin' Donuts and took them with 
me to the plaza bench. I sat and watched the faces of the people passing by, which put me in 
an increasingly calm and peaceful mood. It felt good for some reason I could not fathom, as 
though I had found a comfortable niche in a wall where people would not notice me watching 
them. It had been a very long time since I had had such a good look at people's faces. And not 
only people's faces, I realized. I had hardly looked-really looked-at anything at all over these 
past six months. I sat up straight on the bench and poised myself to look at things. I looked at 
the people, I looked at the buildings soaring overhead, I looked at the spring sky where the 
clouds had parted, I looked at the colorful billboards, I picked up a newspaper lying close by 
and looked at it. Color seemed gradually to be returning to things as evening approached. 



The next morning I took the train to Shinjuku again. I sat on the same bench and looked at 
the faces of the people passing by. Again for lunch I had a doughnut and coffee. I took the 
train home before the evening rush hour started. I made myself dinner, drank a beer, and 
listened to music on the radio. The next day I did exactly the same thing. Nothing happened 
that day, either. I made no discoveries, solved no riddles, answered no questions. But I did 
have the vague sense that I was, little by little, moving closer to something. I could see this 
movement, this gradually increasing closeness, whenever I looked at myself in the mirror 
above the sink. The color of my mark was more vivid than before, warmer than before. My 
mark is alive, I told myself. Just as I am alive, my mark is alive. 
I repeated the routine every day, as I had done the previous summer, boarding the train for 
the city just after ten, sitting on the bench in the plaza by the high-rise, and looking at the 
people passing back and forth all day, without a thought in my head. Now and then, the real 
sounds around me would grow distant and fade away. The only thing I heard at those times 
was the deep, quiet sound of water flowing. I thought of Malta Kano. She had talked about 
listening to the sound of water. Water was her main motif. But I could not recall what Malta 
Kano had said about the sound of water. Nor could I recall her face. All that I could bring 
back was the red color of her vinyl hat. Why had she always worn that red vinyl hat? 
But then sounds gradually returned to me, and once again I returned my gaze to the faces 
of the people. 





On the afternoon of the eighth day of my going into town, a woman spoke to me. At that 
moment, I happened to be looking in another direction, with an empty coffee cup in my hand. 
"Excuse me," she said. I turned and raised my eyes to the face of the woman standing in 
front of me. It was the same middle-aged woman I had encountered here last summer-the only 
person who had spoken to me during the time I spent in the plaza. It had never occurred to me 
that we would meet again, but when in fact she spoke to me, it seemed like the natural 
conclusion of a great flow. 
As before, the woman was extremely well dressed, in terms of both the quality of the 
individual items of clothing she wore and the style with which she had combined them. She 
wore dark tortoiseshell sunglasses, a smoky blue jacket with padded shoulders, and a red 
flannel skirt. Her blouse was of silk, and on the collar of her jacket shone a finely sculpted 
gold brooch. Her red high heels were simple in design, but I could have lived several months 
on what they must have cost her. My own outfit was a mess, as usual: the baseball jacket I 
bought the year I entered college, a gray sweatshirt with a stretched-out neck, frayed blue 
jeans, and formerly white tennis shoes that were now of an indeterminate color. 
Despite the contrast, she sat down next to me, crossed her legs, and, without a word, took 
a box of Virginia Slims from her handbag. She offered me a cigarette as she had last summer, 
and again I declined. She put one between her lips and lit it, using a long, slender gold lighter 
the size of an eraser. Then she took off her sunglasses, put them in her jacket pocket, and 
stared into my eyes as if searching for a coin she had dropped into a shallow pond. I studied 
her eyes in return. They were strange eyes, of great depth but expressionless. 
She narrowed her eyes slightly and said, "So. You're back." 
I nodded. 
I watched the smoke rise from the tip of her narrow cigarette and drift away on the wind. 
She turned to survey the scene around us, as if to ascertain with her own eyes exactly what it 
was I had been looking at from the bench. What she saw didn't seem to interest her, though. 
She turned her eyes to me again. She stared at my mark for a long time, then at my eyes, my 
nose, my mouth, and then my mark again. I had the feeling that what she really wanted to do 
was inspect me like a dog in a show: pry my lips open to check my teeth, look into my ears, 
and whatever else they do. 
"I guess I need some money now," I said. 
She paused a moment. "How much?" 
"Eighty million yen should do it." 
She took her eyes from mine and peered up at the sky as if calculating the amount: let's 
see, if I take that from there, and move this from here ... I studied her makeup all the while-the 
eye shadow faint, like the shadow of a thought, the curl of the eyelashes subtle, like some 
kind of symbol. 
"That's not a small amount of money," she said, with a slight diagonal twist of the lips. 
"I'd say it's enormous." 
Her cigarette was only one-third smoked when she dropped it to the ground and carefully 
crushed it beneath the sole of her high-heel shoe. Then she took a leather calling card case 
from her slim handbag and thrust a card into my hand. 
"Come to this address at exactly four o'clock tomorrow afternoon," she said. 
The address-an office building in the wealthy Akasaka district-was the only thing on the 
card. There was no name. I turned it over to check the back, but it was blank. I brought the 
card to my nose, but it had no fragrance. It was just a normal white paper card. 
"No name?" I said. 
She smiled for the first time and gently shook her head from side to side. "I believe that 
what you need is money. Does money have a name?" 
I shook my head as she was doing. Money had no name, of course. And if it did have a 


name, it would no longer be money. What gave money its true meaning was its dark-night 
namelessness, its breathtaking inter-changeability. 
She stood up from the bench. "You can come at four o'clock, then?" 
"If I do, you'll put money in my hand?" 
"I wonder," she said, a smile at the corners of her eyes like wind patterns in the sand. She 
surveyed the surrounding scene one more time, then smoothed her skirt with a perfunctory 
sweep of the hand. 
Taking quick steps, she disappeared into the flow of people. I went on looking at the 
cigarette she had crushed out, at the lipstick coloring its filter end. The bright red reminded 
me of Malta Kano's vinyl hat. 
If I had anything in my favor, it was that I had nothing to lose. Probably. 
