


The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle



22 



Jellyfish from All A r o u n d the World 

* 


Things Metamorphosed 



I sit down in front of Cinnamon's computer at the appointed time and use the 
password to access the communications program. Then I input the numbers I've been 
given by Ushikawa. It will take five minutes for the circuits to connect. I start sipping the 
coffee I have prepared and work to steady my breathing. The coffee is tasteless, though, 
and the air I inhale has a harsh edge to it. 
Finally, the computer beeps and a message appears on the screen, in forming me that 
the connection has been made and the computer is ready br two- way communication. I 
specify that this is to be a collect call. If '. am careful to prevent a record of this 
transaction from being made, I should be able to keep Cinnamon from finding out that I 
used the computer (though of this I am anything but confident: this is his labyrinth; I'm 
nothing but a powerless stranger here). 
A far longer time goes by than I had anticipated, but finally the message appears that 
the other party has accepted the charges. Beyond this screen, at the far end of the cable 
that creeps through Tokyo's under ground darkness, may be Kumiko. She, too, should be 
sitting before a monitor, with her hands on a keyboard. In reality, all I can see is my mon-
itor, which sits there making a faint electronic squeal. I click on the box to choose Send 
mode and type the words that I have been rehearsing over and over in my brain. 
>I have one question for you. It's not much of a 
question, but I need proof that it's really you out there. 
Here it is: The first time we went out together, long 
before we were married, we went to the aquarium. I want you 
to tell me what you were most fascinated to see there. 
I click on the symbol for sending the text (I want you to tell me what 
you were most fascinated to see t here . -<) . Then I switch to 
Receive mode. 
The answer comes back after a short, silent interval. It is a short answer. 
>Jellyfish. Jellyfish from all around the world .< 
My question and the answer to it are lined up on the upper and lower halves of the 
screen. I stare at them for a while. Jellyfish from all around the 
world.< It has to be Kumiko. The real Kumiko. That very fact, though, serves only to 
fill me with pain. I feel as if my insides are being ripped out. Why is this the only way that 
the two of us can talk to each other? I have no choice now but to accept it, though. And 
so I begin typing. 
>Let me start with the good news. The cat came back this 
spring. All of a sudden. He was kind of emaciated, but he 
was healthy and unharmed. He's stayed home ever since. I 
know I should have consulted with you before I did this, 
but I gave him a new name. Mackerel. Like the fish. We're 
getting along together just fine. This is good news, I 
guess.< 
A delay follows. I can' t tell whether it is due to the time lag inherent in this form of 
communication or a silence on Kumiko's part. 

>I'm so happy to hear the cat is still alive! I was 
worried about him.< 
I take a sip of coffee to moisten my now dry mouth. Then I start typ ing again. 
>Now for the bad news. Actually, aside from the fact that 
the cat is back, it seems that everything else is going to 
be bad news. First of all, I still haven't been able to 
solve any riddles. 
I reread what I have written, then continue to type. 
First riddle: Where are you now? What are you doing 
there? Why do you continue to stay away from me? Why don't 
you want to see me? Is there some reason for that? I mean, 
there are so many things that you and I have to talk about 
face -to-face. Don't you think so?< 
It takes her some time to reply to this. I imagine her sitting in front of the keyboard, 
biting her lip and thinking. Finally, the cursor begins to dart across the screen in response 
to the movement of her fingers. 
>Everything I wanted to say to you I wrote in the letter 
I sent. What I most want you to understand is that, in many 
ways, I am no longer the Kumiko you knew. People change for 
all sorts of reasons, and in some cases the transformation 
makes them go bad. That is why I don't want to see you. And 
that is why I don't want to come back to you. 
The cursor halts and remains blinking in one spot, searching for words. I keep my 
eyes fixed on it for ten seconds, twenty seconds, waiting for it to form new words on the 
screen. The transformation makes them go bad? 
If possible, I would like you to forget about me as soon 
as you can. The best thing for both of us would be if you 
were to complete the formalities for divorce and begin a 
whole new life. It doesn't matter where I am now or what I 
am doing. The most important thing is that, for whatever 
reason, you and I have already been separated into two 
entirely different worlds. And there is no way we can ever 
go back to being what we were. Please try to understand how 
painful it is for me to be communicating with you like 
this. You probably can't imagine how it tears me apart.< 
I reread Kumiko's words several times. I find in them no sign of hesitation, no 
suggestion they come from anything but the deepest, most painful conviction. She has 
probably rehearsed them in her mind any number of times. But still, I have to find a way 
to shake this impenetrable wall of hers, if only to make it tremble. I go back to the 
keyboard. 
>What you say is somewhat vague and difficult for me to 
grasp. You say you've gone bad, but what does that mean in 
concrete terms? I just don't understand. Tomatoes go bad. 
Umbrellas go bad. That I can understand. Tomatoes rot and 
umbrellas get bent out of shape. But what does it mean to 
say that you have "gone bad"? It doesn't give me any 
concrete image. You said in your letter that you had sex 

with somebody other than me, but could that make you "go 
bad"? Yes, of course it was a shock to me. But that is a 
little different from making a human being "go bad," I 
would think.< 
A long pause follows. I begin to worry that Kumiko has disappeared somewhere. But 
then her letters begin to line up on the screen. 
>You may be right, but there is more to it than that. 
Another deep silence follows. She is choosing her words carefully, pulling them out 
of a drawer. 
That is just one manifestation. "Going bad" is something 
that happens over a longer period of time. It was something 
decided in advance, without me, in a pitch-dark room 
somewhere, by someone else's hand. When I met and married 
you, it seemed to me that I had a whole new set of 
possibilities. I hoped that I might be able to escape 
through an opening somewhere. But I guess that was just an 
illusion. There are signs for everything, which is why I 
tried so hard to find our cat when he di sappeared that 
time. 
I keep staring at the message on the screen, but still no Send mark appears. My own 
machine is still set to Receive. Kumiko is thinking about what to write next. " Going 
bad" is something that happens over a longer period of time. 
What is she trying to tell me? I concentrate my attention on the screen, but all I find there 
is a kind of invisible wall. Once more the letters begin to line up on the screen. 
I want you to think about me this way if you can: that I 
am slowly dying of an incurable disease-one that causes my 
face and body gradually to disintegrate. This is just a 
metaphor, of course. My face and body are not actually 
disintegrating. But this is something very close to the 
truth. And that is why I don't want to show myself to you. 
I know that a vague metaphor like this is not going to help 
you understand everything about the situation in which I 
find myself. I don't expect it to convince you of the truth 
of what I am saying. I feel terrible about this, but there 
is simply nothing more I can say. All you can do is accept 
it.< 
An incurable disease. 
I check to be sure that I am in the Send mode and start typing. 
>If you say you want me to accept your metaphor, I don't 
mind accepting it. But there is one thing that I simply 
cannot understand. Even supposing that you have, as you 
say, "gone bad" and that you have "an incurable disease," 
why of all people did you have to go to Noboru Wataya with 
it? Why didn't you stay here with me? Why aren't we 
together? Isn't that what we got married for?< 
Silence. I can almost feel its weight and hardness in my hands. I fold my hands on the 
desk and take several deep breaths. Then the answer comes. 

>The reason I am here, like it or not, is because this is 
the proper place for me. This is where I have to be. I have 
no right to choose otherwise. Even if I wanted to see you, 
I couldn't do it. Do you think I DON'T want to see you? 
There is a blank moment in which she seems to be holding her breath. Then her 
fingers start to move again. 
So please, don't torture me about this any longer. If 
there is any one thing that you can do for me, it would be 
to forget about my existence as quickly as possible. Take 
those years that we Lived together and push them outside 
your memory as if they never existed. That, finally, is the 
best thing you can do for both of us. This is what I truly 
believe.< 
To this I reply: 
>You say you want me to forget everything. You say you 
want me to leave you alone. But still, at the same time, 
from somewhere in this world, you are be gging for my help. 
That voice is faint and distant, but I can hear it 
distinctly on quiet nights. It IS your voice: I'm sure of 
that. I can accept the fact that one Kumiko is trying hard 
to get away from me, and she probably has her reasons for 
doing so. But there is another Kumiko, who is trying just 
as hard to get close to me. That is what I truly believe. 
No matter what you may say to me here, I have to believe in 
the Kumiko who wants my help and is trying to get close to 
me. No matter what you tell me, no matter how legitimate 
your reasons, I can never just forget about you, I can 
never push the years we spent together out of my mind. I 
can't do it because they really happened, they are part of 
my life, and there is no way I can just erase them. That 
would be the same as erasing my own self. I have to know 
what legitimate reason there could be for doing such a 
thing.< 
Another blank period goes by. I can feel her silence through the monitor. Like heavy 
smoke, it creeps in through a corner of the screen and drifts across the floor. I know about 
these silences of Kumiko's. I've seen them, experienced them any number of times in our 
life together. She's holding her breath now, sitting in front of the computer screen with 
brows knit in total concentration. I reach out for my cup and take a sip of cold coffee. 
Then, with the empty cup between my hands, I hold my breath and stare at the screen the 
way Kumiko is doing. The two of us are linked together by the heavy bonds of silence 
that pass through the wall separating our two worlds. We need each other more than 
anything, I feel without a doubt. 
>I don't know .< 
>Well, I DO know. 
I set my coffee cup down and type as quickly as I can, as if to catch the fleeting tail of 
time. 
I know this. I know that I want to find my way to where 

you are - you, the Kumiko who wants me to rescue her. What 
I do not know yet, unfortunately, is how to get there and 
what it is that's waiting for me there. In this whole long 
time since you left, I've lived with a feeling as if I had 
been thrown into absolute darkness. Slowly but surely, 
though, I am getting closer to the core, to that place 
where the core of things is located. I wanted to let you 
know that. I'm getting closer to where you are, and I 
intend to get closer still.< 
I rest my hands on the keyboard and wait for her answer. 
>I don't understand any of this. 
Kumiko types this and ends our conversation: 
Goodbye.<<< 




The screen informs me that the other party has left the circuit. Our conversation is 
finished. Still, I go on staring at the screen, waiting for some thing to happen. Maybe 
Kumiko will change her mind and come back on- line. Maybe she'll think of something 
she forgot to say. But she does not come back. I give up after twenty minutes. I save the 
file, then go to the kitchen for a drink of cold water. I empty my mind out for a while, 
breathing steadily by the refrigerator. A terrible quiet seems to have descended on 
everything. I feel as if the world is listening for my next thought. But I can't think of 
anything. Sorry, but I just can't think of anything. 
I go back to the computer and sit there, carefully rereading our entire exchange on the 
glowing tube from beginning to end: what I said, what she said, what I said to that, what 
she said to that. The whole thing is still there on the screen, with a certain graphic 
intensity. As my eyes follow the rows of characters she has made, I can hear her voice. I 
can recognize the rise and fall of her voice, the subtle tones and pauses. The cursor on the 
last line keeps up its blinking with all the regularity of a heartbeat, waiting with bated 
breath for the next word to be sent. But there is no next word. 
After engraving the entire conversation in my mind (having decided I had better not 
print it out), I click on the box to exit communications mode. I direct the program to 
leave no record in the operations file, and after checking to be sure that this has been 
done, I cut the switch. The computer beeps, and the monitor screen goes dead white. The 
monoto nous mechanical drone is swallowed up in the silence of the room, like a vivid 
dream ripped out by the hand of nothingness. 



I don't know how much time has gone by since then. But when I realize where I am, I 
find myself staring at my ha nds lying on the table. They bear the marks of having had 
eyes sharply focused on them for a long time. 
"Going bad" is something that happens over a Longer 
period of time. 
How long a period of time is that? 
¡¡
