


receive/obtain/become

additionally,

very

many/numerous

children

In summary

due to

so as to meet the demand via public services
the money may never reach the population due to the corruption（不加s）
disease不加s

making and enforcing laws
make an effort

hold the idea that； despite the fact that

This is because ... （不加that）

futhermore

the tax levied from high-income earners
tax=individual contributions to the runnig costs of the community are not only appropriate but essential because 
invest tax money in[!] the provision提供 of public services and facilities which are indispensable of the daily lives of the public.
without tax revenue it is difficult for a country to function effectively
hard-earned money

 food, and medical and educational aid is

the chances are that很可能
raises theissue of

a large proportion of their time
the applicatio of teamwork (group decision) as a management practice, which is touted as efficacious by professors of the business school
make bad choices
a source of innovation
earn a lot from...
freezing conditions
for deep analysis

On the other hand, theoretical knowledge should not be overvalued.
but I do not agree with the notion that the knowledge gained in university is of little value to one's career achievement.

flat, bonding, independence, decision-making, routine takss, (potentially gain enhanced) interpersonal skills, personal resources
their emotional pressures may be so badly handled that the relationship with their parents is affected and they do not see the value in maintaining close contact with family.
cope with challenges
get/receive advice
experience difficulties
can also (v.)

can be made exmpt from tuition fees

dearth of jobs
scarcity dificiency insufficiency

The total was close to 20% of the workforce
We must harness the skill and creativity of our workforce.
Men still outnumber women in the paid workforce. 

disposal of refuse

modern offices become more and more mechanized
modern irrigation

minimize damage and avoid loss of 
significance influence

alleviate stress
starvation

government revenue

manufacture goods
manufacture product
manufacture products

invest in infrastructure 
provide infrastructure 
build infrastructure 
develop infrastructure
improve infrastructure 

intensify magnify

community is used for less serious offenders
wrongdoer a delinquent person lawbreaker

more often than not

university accommodation, parental home, share flats with friends/flatmates
bonding with family (will suffer)
the length of lease
decision-making ability, managing the monthly budget, keepinga house
enter the workforce
which can prepare them for challenges
potentially gain enhanced interpersonal skills
people from all walks of life in different setting (joining some clubs, going to gym, attending parties and taking up a part-time job)
which is of value to
personal resources to draw upon, a network of contacts
combat the sense of lonliness
with their parents
maintain close contact

community service: cleaning streets, tending public gardens and removing graffiti
imposing prison sentences/ sending criminals to prison
prisons are over flowing and can't cope
punitive刑罚的 efforts
rehabilitation恢复 efforts
offender罪犯/lawbreaker
other approaches/methods
law-abiding守法的
when incarcerated在狱中
are disengaged from communities
foster
probation缓刑
the spur of the moment
repent后悔
corrective method; correct mistakes
deprive them of freedom
modify behaviour

complex nominal groups: the knowledge children can gain from these programmes
in ways that traditioinal approaches can not match
convery information 
the number of hours devoted to ... will drop
soup opera
TV programmes
engage their interest

can be taken to refer ...
uphold维护 uphold some values which are critical to a harmonious society loyality, honesty and integrity
inhibit阻止 at least appear to inhibit social progress
laws tend to/prone to limit freedom supress creativity
censorship law (example) 
voice their concerns
pinpoint and tackle some problems such as corruption and bureaucracy
impose harsh penalities to some business practices, such as making exaggerated claims
so as to
would-will: if, will; is-would: it would be difficult to keep a society running without laws
achieve very negative outcomes
fraudulent or violent activities

(involve) long-haul transportation, which relies on the use of different modes of transport, including airplanes and road transport
stagnant停滞不前的 market growth is stagnant

purchase; imported products/imported from overseas
natural endowment; the avaliability of cheap labour
is beneficial to
cost management/ control the cost of production
household goods; geographic locations and weather conditions
fill unmet needs
clothing, foodwear, bed linen and blankets
intensify the/fierce competition, put ... under pressure
high tariffs关税 the market distorted by tariffs

Within society, there is a growing gulf between rich and poor.柯林斯
are interwined
the accumulated body of
capitalize on
spark thoughts
develop-progress-promote
fund-invest-subsidize
be commited to do
cultural heritage
a wealth of
simply put
making it not surprising
Develop/improve competence
1. It is rife to maintain vanity. 保持虚荣心是很常见的2. The method is superior to the old one. 这个（教育）方法比另一个更好3. Doting parents cater to their children’s every wish. 宠溺的父母满足他们孩子的一切需求4. Impose rules and regulations on children. 给孩子们制定规则5. Learn by rote 死记硬背6. Peer pressure 同辈压力7. Youth crime/ juvenile delinquency is largely due to parental permissiveness. 青少年犯罪很大程度上是父母的放纵造成的再来个媒体类：1. The proliferation of the Internet 互联网的普及2. Fabricate evidence and distort the truth 捏造证据歪曲事实3. Outdated information 过时的信息4. Up-to-date Information 最新的信息5. Be inundated with obscene content充满不良内容6. Advertising is a form of modern art 广告是一种现代艺术7. Brand image 品牌形象8. Consumer culture 消费文化
He was engrossed in his job to the detriment of his health.
Children spend too much time on schoolwork, to the detriment of other activities.
These difficulties have been overcome without detriment to performance.
He ascribed his failure to bad luck.; We ascribe great importance to these policies.