
可以加个background开头
These days, the government spends a large part of its budget not only on public services, but also the arts. 

What arts tell you about life that science cannot tell

考频可以参考雅思哥的预测

扩展、拉长、反复解释句子

advan and disadvan (do the advan outweight disadvan?/the downside of); to what extent you agree or disagree; discuss both views and give your own; why has it happened, how to solve it; 混合 (why is the case? what could be the disadvan?)

加一个让步段
个人、社会、集体、政府
in sum, i agree with idea of

although ..., I do not agree/consider a good idea to ...
In conclusion, I believe that ... has a benefical effect on .../ the overall effect of ... is positive, despite the .../although ... (can yield benefits for ...)
确定应该讨论结果（某个事件或论断给出），还是原因（结果给出），或是两个事件的关系（如more homework和find work）
如果题目有rather than或instead of，前后内容都可以作为观点去写
第一句改写题目
It has been suggested that ...; Recently, the discussion about whether ... has become a heated one.; it is common .../ it is not unusual/ has been recognised as .../ is regarded as/ has been accepted as
spark controversies
can have a negative effect on , which are 
adversely affect 
some people claim……可以直接去掉，作为事实来写，或者consider
很多a large propotion of
... from home-... from households
the only way-necessary
solution-option
legal requirement-legally requried
in many countries, the proportion of older people is steadily increasing - many countries have seen their population at an unprecedented pace.
如不会改写，可以只说原因（6.5-7）... (technological change/advances and the increase in personal wealth) have contributed to (the imporvement in life expectancy)
a positive/negative trend-the advans outweigh the disadvans
中心句+具体解释+举例+（对比）
waste; dump waste-rubbish; sort rubbish; dispose of rubbish
instructed by the government
转折although ... to some extent, I believe ...
转折段Despite ...
... approach
it may not ... when the ... has (been) ...
reckless
disseminate
ramification后果 legal ramification
legal enforcement
a fine/fines
infrastructure
否定的时候用significant [benefift], comparatively is [limited]来减弱语气
On the other hand, some students may not be able to adapt to campus life if they stay away from school for a long period of time.
demographic人口的
issues问题
related to-associated with
increase dramatically
impose a burden on (taxpayers)
pour money into doing sth./spend money in doing sth.
the pace of work/the productivity of the workforce will slow/drop as ..., stay in the workforce
profitability
has an adverse impact
post职位, in which they normally have expertise
impart (their knowledge) to 
tape into (the wisdom of), make the (wisdom of) 
process information, handle work
decades' experience
ageing英式；aging美式 ageing-related Alzheimer Parkinson

effect sth. (e.g. social change)
media violence
incidences事件
recount叙述
the amount of/the rate of
While much has been ..., litter has been ...
themodification矫正/修改
rather than take crude half measures to repair complex social problems
juvenile
beget



