The two images show the (major/principal) changes made to an island which has been developed for tourism
the diagram show the planned changes to ...

visitors can enter the ... through the south entrance and see reception immediately/see the reception in front of them

Overall the fundamental change proposed to the ... is ...

located，sited, situated, lie
link (with), connect, join e.g. connected with each other by footpaths.
extended
reduced in size
replaced, demolished, removed, displaced, to make way for
relocated
built, constructed, developed, created, proposed, added

in the southeast of 在里面
on the south side of 在边上
to 在外面 A new restaurant has been built to the south of the city.
near, next to, close to, adjacent to
e.g. Wineries are conveniently located near major highways.
within, e.g. The zoo is located within a national forest
at 具体的地方 The stairs are located at the back of the hotel.
outside
alongside, e.g. there are some shops alongside the main road.
with its changing room and seating at either side（一边有changing room，一边有seating）
there are also outdoor courts室外球场 next to the centre on the east and west sides, but both of them are set to be removed to make way for the extension of the centre, which will make it about three times as big as it is now.

part, e.g. the park covers the southern part of the city
edge side, e.g. the house lies on the northern edge of the villiage.
The power plant is on the eastern side of the mountainous area.
Offices are all in the west wing.
The hotel is located at the northern end of this street.
There are houses on the southern tip of this area.
the park covers the north-western corner of the city.
in the centre of the classroom
people can see the reception at the front of the building
Water can be stored at the back of the house

is expected to/planned to/set to[!great vocab]/proposed to
old/past/original
currently, now, at present; in the past; in the future/according to the plan/as planned
two new changing rooms are also planned for the southwestern

two clusters of accommodation huts简陋的小屋子
reception building
, linked with a restaurant to the north by a rather basic road
on the south coast about 20 m south of the reception building
pier, which allow boats to berth
cater the tourists' needs such as dining, lodging, yachting快艇运动 and swimming.
to meet the future needs/potential demand
pedestrianisation
to increase the options, with a greater variety to meet the diverse needs of users





 