the department provides a congenial atmosphere for research.
develop congenial relationship with

Describe your favorite place in your house or apartment where you can relax

You should say:

    where it is

    what it is like

    what you enjoy doing there

and explain why you feel relaxed in this place

Um, this place should be my own bedroom. I live with my parents on the 10th floor of a 20-story apartment building. We’ve been living there for 5 years now and ... I’ve enjoyed it a lot; the transportation is good and there’s a park nearby, but ... um, okay, my room. Well, it’s on the south side of the apartment, so the south-facing windows can let in a lot of natural sunlight, which is great because sunshine puts me in a good mood. If it were dark and gloomy, I’d feel depressed.

What I enjoy doing there ... well, I like to hole up in my room and do a variety of things, like of course, I have to study, but I also read, listen to music, chat with friends online and watch movies in that little space. I’ve been preparing for this IELTS test for a few months now, and I’ve combined watching movies and learning English together. For example, I watched the 7th movie of the Fast and Furious series last weekend and I was speaking along the whole time. One of my teachers had told me that it would be good for my speaking and listening.

Anyway, I feel relaxed in my bedroom just because it’s my own space. No one disturbs or distracts me. My parents always knock before walking inside, which I think is really good. I love them for that.

20-story/storey apartment building 20层高的公寓楼

we’ve been living here ... 注意现在完成进行时

south-facing 朝南的

let in natural light 让自然光进来

put me in a good mood 让我有个好心情

if it were ..., I’d/I would ... 注意虚拟语气

gloomy 昏暗的、幽暗的

hole up （为免受打扰等而）躲藏、隔绝

a variety of ... 多种多样...

I’ve been preparing ... 注意现在完成进行时

prepare for sth 为...做准备

series 系列

speak along 跟着一起说

the whole time 一直

one of my teachers had told me that ... 注意过去完成时

disturb sb 干扰、妨碍...

distract sb 使...分心

knock 敲门
