别人问姜文《一步之遥》致敬了哪些电影，姜文却说：“我这么狂妄一人，没那个习惯。” 就好像《本命年》在柏林电影节参展，并获得柏林国际电影节银熊奖时，记者采访姜文，说他的表演很像马龙·白兰度、罗伯特·德尼罗，问姜文是不是很喜欢他们，姜文说：“对不起，我没听说过他们。” 可是有人“泄密”：姜文找谢飞要了《愤怒的公牛》录像带，因为他特别喜欢罗伯特·德尼罗这个演员，想学习硬汉表演法。

他说：“我就是想让你们知道，他有些不是你们说得那样。”

因为象征并不一定是一一对应的，也不必是每个都要有标的，就像鲁迅先生说的，（）,例如张牧之显然是毛泽东和朱德的混合；金庸的小说《笑傲江湖》隐喻那时事务，可是显然并不是每人每事都有的。

是多线并进的，既可以是斗争时，也可以是建国后。

马拉着列车开来了，上面有着早已不用了铁血十八星，上海和知识分子“吃着火锅唱着歌”，国民革命虽然成功了，但是此时此刻，恰如彼时彼刻。

张麻子曾追随松坡将军，他们曾在灯影里。

他教人们“不准跪”。

好人不能辩白，就得被人拿枪指着，得把自己的肚子剖开才能证明自己没有吃两碗粉。

人们总要以为一个麻匪的名字不能叫“张牧之”，而要叫“张麻子”，而且他的脸上真的要有麻子。

敌人装扮成ta们的样子。

老三装模作样地戴着大哥的九筒。他是想拿大哥的九筒呢？还是他戴着大哥的九筒发号施令了呢？

师爷的口哨出卖了ta们。

The Great leap和大吃饱是知识分子/宣传们的儿子。知识分子们以为是因为张麻子被炸死的，但那实际上是假麻子。

人民是愚昧的、麻木的、迟钝的，“谁赢他们帮谁”。要有一个青天大老爷来，一个天降伟人带领ta们。尽管最后总是需要人民的力量。我称这种史观为“猛男史观”，希望有一个天降猛男来领导人民。不把命运放在自己的手里而交到别人的手里。

人们眼里的他的不好的印象，都是被欺骗了；那些以为是他干的不好的事，都是别人干的

一部分历史被略去了，抗战被隐去了；其它的事情他没有责任，他不知情，他没有难辞其咎，他没有退居二线，他的“最后的革命”，他向人性本身（人的软弱、局限、贪婪和层级）开战的最后舞蹈呢？那美丽的残酷，又去哪里了呢？那放肆的私刑遍地的群众性的猎巫运动消去了。

郭旅长的兵呢？被一场打出国威影响了后来格局的战争，被一场卫国之战，无意义的、试探彼此谁能忍受这无意义得更久的战争，或是一场两个霸权大国开展的帝国主义的代理人战争。

老二因为师爷的口哨和 背叛死了。可是一个老二死了，可是另一个“老二”是怎么死得呢？

人民拿走了一切，就连他坐下的位置也被拿走了。可是土地、城乡二元体制、剪刀差呢？

老三在黄四郎那里“见识到了”，被诱惑了，背叛了革命，他带着曾经拿枪更美的女子去了上海，“浦东就是上海，上海就是浦东”。黄四郎又回来了，他借着师爷的皮，借着知识分子的皮又回来了。

一个幽灵，毛主义的幽灵，正飘荡在历史的轨道上，留下一个夕阳下远去的背影。

The historical narrative of Let The Bullets Fly

Others asked Jiang Wen "por una cabeza" tribute to which films, Jiang Wen said, "I'm so arrogant one, not that habit." It's like when "Black Snow" was exhibited at the Berlin Film Festival and won the Silver Bear at the Berlin International Film Festival, a reporter interviewed Jiang Wen and said his performance was very much like Marlon Brando and Robert De Niro, asking if Jiang Wen liked them a lot, and Jiang Wen said, "Sorry, I've never heard of them." But someone "leaked": Jiang Wen asked Xie Fei(the director of Black Snow) for the video of Raging Bull , because he especially liked Robert De Niro, the actor, and wanted to learn the tough guy method of acting.
He said, "I just want you to know that some parts of him(Mao) is not what you say he is."
Because the symbols do not necessarily correspond to something one-to-one, nor does everything has an object, as Lu Xun said, (),For example, Zhang Mu Zhi(Pocky Zhang) is obviously a mixture of Mao and Zhu De; Jin Yong's novel "Laughing Proudly at the World"（笑傲江湖） is a metaphor for the affairs of the First Republic(1949~1977) and the Second Republic(1977~1992), but obviously not every character and plot in the novel are metaphors for something.
This story can be a metaphor for multiple periods at the same time, both the time of the Chinese Civil War and the time after the founding of the republic (People's republic of China).
The horse（马）-drawn train（列） (Marxism-Leninism，马列) came with the long-lost Iron Blood Eighteen Stars (the pattern of the flag used in the Wuchang Uprising that overthrew the Qing Dynasty), Shanghai (the place where the early Communist Party leaders seated) and intellectuals "eating hot pot and singing songs", and the National Revolution was successful, but this era was still the same as the past.
Pocky Zhang had followed General Song Po (Cai E who had launched a crusade against Yuan Shikai, who restored the imperial system in the Republic) and each of them(Pocky Zhang and Huang Silang) had been in the shadow of the lamp.
He(Mao) taught people "no kneeling".
It's thought that Good people should not defend themselves, that they should be held at gunpoint, that they should have their hearts cut open to prove their innocence
People always thought that a bandit's name could not be "Zhang Mu Zhi"（张牧之，shepherd）, but "Pocky Zhang", and that his face should really have pockmarks.
The enemies dressed up as communists to oppress the people.
The third eldest brother (Deng Xiaoping (稻shopping，rice shopping, Deng was partially responsible for the famine, and although Deng's reform and opening up changed China, it also opened the door to corruption and power rent-seeking)) pretended to wear the mask of the eldest brother（Mao）. Was he trying to take big brother's seat? Or did he give orders while wearing big brother's mask?
The Counselor(intellects) betrayed them（The Communist）.
Great Leap Forward and the Great Chinese Famine was the son of intellectuals/propagandists. The intellectuals thought it was because Mao that they were blown up, but that was actually fake Mao.
The people were ignorant, numb and slow, "whoever wins they help". They called upon a great lord to do justice for them, a great man from heaven to lead the people. Although in the end the power of the people was always required. I call this conception of history the "hunk man theory", hoping that a hunk man will come from heaven to lead the people. They do not take their fate into their own hands, but leave it in the hands of others.
The bad impressions people had of Mao were because of deception; the bad things they thought he did were done by others.
Parts of history were omitted, the Anti-Japanese War was hidden, and his retreating to the second line because of his fault; he was not responsible for the rest (the famine and other things), he did not know, he should not take the blame. But where is his "last revolution"(The Cultural revolution), his last dance of war against human nature itself (human weakness, limitation, greed and classes)? And where did that beautiful cruelty go? This film does not show this part of history. The mass witch-hunting movement (the Cultural Revolution), with its unbridled lynchings all over the place, has disappeared in the movie.
Where were the soldiers of Brigadier Guo (U.S. And Huang Silang, who ran the bulk of the Republic of China's tobacco businesss for Brigadier Guo, symbolizes the Kuomintang (KMT), who in this narrative is the Comprador-like role)? The United States was "defeated" by a war "in which China fought a war of national prestige that influenced the subsequent world situation (e.g., the Vietnam War)", by a war of defense, by a meaningless test of who could endure the meaninglessness longer, or by a proxy war of imperialism between two hegemonic powers (China and America) on the land of Korea and North Korea.
The second eldest brother died because of the and betrayal and Counselor's whistle. But how did the "other" second (Liu Shaoqi, killed by Red Guards students during the Cultural Revolution, when he was the president of China) die?
The people took everything away, even the seat he (Mao) was sitting in. But what about the land that was promised to the people by the Party and then taken away, the dualistic structure of urban areas and rural areas (artificially dividing people into urban and rural areas and restricting population movement with a household registration system), and the Price scissors?
Deng Xiaoping was tempted and betrayed the revolution, he took the woman who used to be "more beautiful with a gun" to Shanghai (capitalism), "Pudong is Shanghai, Shanghai is Pudong". The bureaucrats and capitalists came back, and they came back in the skin of Counselor, in the skin of intellectuals.
A spectre was/is haunting on the track of history — the spectre of Maoism, leaving a distant back in the sunset.
