
Bays, Timothy, "Skolem's Paradox", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2014/entries/paradox-skolem/>.

2007a, “The Mathematics of Skolem's Paradox,” in Jacquette 2007, pp. 615-648.
Skolem, T., 1922, “Some Remarks on Axiomitized Set Theory,” in van Heijenoort 1967, pp. 290–301.

 Indeed, several authors have suggested that transitivity may be necessary to formulate a philosophically significant version of the paradox (Benacerraf 1985; Wright 1985). See Tennant and McCarty 1987 for some objections to the latter view.
Wright, C., 1985, “Skolem and the Skeptic,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 59: 116–137.
Tennant, N. and McCarty, C., 1987, “Skolem's Paradox and Constructivism,” The Journal of Philosophical Logic, 16: 165–202. (skolem's paradox may be invalid in weaker logic; 
and stronger logic, c.f. Shapiro )

On this reading, then, Skolem's Paradox plays only a modest role in Skolem's overall argument. It serves to highlight some problems with one particular conception of set theory (the algebraic conception), but it plays no role in Skolem's arguments against other conceptions of set theory....Versions of this foundationalist reading of Skolem's paper can be found in George 1985 and Benacerraf 1985; see Jané 2001 for some criticisms of this line of interpretation.
George, A., 1985, “Skolem and the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorems,” History and Philosophy of Logic, 6: 75–89.
Jané, I., 2001, “Reflections on Skolem's Relativity of Set-Theoretical Concepts,” Philosophia Mathematica, 3: 129–153.(The set-theoretic paradoxes show that we should not naively take Cantor's Theorem at face value—so, Cantor's proof itself doesn't force us to accept uncountable sets. Skolem's Paradox shows that adopting an algebraic understanding of the set-theoretic axioms also doesn't force us to accept uncountable sets, since we can always interpret these axioms as applying to a model that's only countable.)

Zermelo himself came to accept the algebraic conception of his axioms, but he then insisted that these axioms should be interpreted in second-order terms and that, so interpreted, they do not fall prey to Skolem's Paradox (Zermelo 1930; Taylor 1993; Ebbinghaus 2003). Similarly, Tarski suggested that Skolem's Paradox could be defused by treating “∈” as a logical constant in some version of type theory (see the remarks published at the end of Skolem 1958). But, while both of these suggestions would allow mathematicians to avoid Skolem's Paradox, they both depend on accepting pieces of powerful mathematical machinery which Skolem—on any reading of his paper—would almost certainly have wanted to reject. Given Skolem's philosophical purposes, therefore, these contemporary responses to his paradox would not have seemed very threatening (see Skolem 1955 and Skolem 1958 for some of Skolem's own reflections on these kinds of responses).

Taylor, G., 1993, “Zermelo, Reductionism, and the Philosophy of Mathematics,” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 34: 539–563.
Skolem, 1955, “A Critical Remark on Foundational Research,” in Skolem 1970, pp. 581–586.
–––, 1958, “Une Relativisation des Notions Mathematiques Fondementales,” in Skolem 1970, pp. 587–600.

Their view, which Michael Resnik has dubbed the “Skolemite” view, holds that the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems really do show that set-theoretic notions are relative. Indeed, Skolemites are often willing to go a bit further than this and claim that, although a given set may be uncountable “relative to the means of expression of an axiom system,” every set is countable when considered from an “absolute” perspective (Kneale and Kneale 1962; Goodstein 1963; Wang 1964; Fine 1968; Thomas 1968, 1971).
Kneale, W. and Kneale, M., 1962, The Development of Logic, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Goodstein, R. L., 1963, “The Significance of Incompleteness Theorems,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 14: 208–220.
Wang, H., 1964, A Survey of Mathematical Logic, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Fine, A., 1968, “Quantification over the Real Numbers,” Philosophical Studies, 19: 27–31.
Thomas, W., 1968, “Platonism and the Skolem Paradox,” Analysis, 28: 193–196.
–––, 1971, “On Behalf of the Skolemite,” Analysis, 31: 177–186.

This issue is exacerbated when we focus on the third step in the Skolemite argument, since that step seems to require both an absolute account of the natural numbers and an absolute account of enumeration in order to formulate its conception of “absolute countability”(see Thomas 1971; Klenk 1976; and Bellotti 2006 for some concerns about this line of argument).
In short: the very fact that Skolemite arguments turn on substantial mathematical theorems seems to force the Skolemite into accepting that some parts of mathematics are not subject to Skolemite relativity. (In addition to the references in the last paragraph, see Bays 2001; Bellotti 2005; and Bays 2007b for discussion of this kind of point in the context of Putnam's model-theoretic argument.)
Bays, T., 2001, “On Putnam and his Models,” The Journal of Philosophy, 98: 331–50.
Bellotti, L., 2005, “Putnam and Constructibility,” Erkenntnis, 62: 395–409.
–––, 2007b, “More on Putnam's Models: A Response to Bellotti,” Erkenntnis, 67: 119–135.

 it's not enough for Skolemites to defend an algebraic approach to the axiomatization of set theory, they need to show that a first-order algebraic approach is the right way to go. See Hart 1970 and Shapiro 1991 for developments of this line of argument.
Hart, W., 1970, “Skolem's Promises and Paradoxes,” The Journal of Philosophy, 67: 98–109.

 e.g., the status of our informal understanding of set-theoretic language, the legitimacy of second-order quantification, and the identity conditions associated with mathematical objects in structuralist philosophies of mathematics. Exploring these issues would take us pretty far away from Skolem's Paradox itself. For a recent survey of some of the relevant literature here, see Bellotti 2006.
Bellotti, L., 2006, “Skolem, the Skolem ‘Paradox’ and Informal Mathematics,” Theoria, 72: 177–220.

For more on the multiverse, see Hamkins 2011 and Hamkins 2012. For some criticisms, see Koellner 2013 (under Other Internet Resources).
Hamkins, J. D., 2011, “The Set-Theoretic Multiverse: A Natural Context for Set Theory,” Annals of the Japan Association for Philosophy of Science, 19: 37–55.
–––, 2012, “The Set-Theoretic Multiverse,” Review of Symbolic Logic, 5: 416–449.
Koellner, P., 2013, “Hamkins on the Multiverse,”http://logic.harvard.edu/EFI_Hamkins_Comments.pdf. manuscript.


First, the model-theoretic interpretation understands “∈” to refer to whatever binary relation on M happens to fall under the interpretation function of M; in contrast, the ordinary-English interpretation of Ω(x) understands “∈” to refer to the real set-theoretic membership relation. But there is no reason to think that these two understandings agree with each other. We can find cases were M ⊨ m1 ∈ m2, despite the fact that neither m1 nor m2 are even sets (indeed, as far as the model theory is concerned, m1 and m2 could both be cats, or rabbits, or hedgehogs, or …).[18] Further, even when all of the elements in M are sets, this provides no guarantee that the model-theoretic understanding of “∈” will agree with the ordinary English understanding. We can find a case where m1 and m2 are genuine sets, but where M ⊨ m1 ∈ m2, despite the fact that m1 is not really a member of m2; similarly, we can find a case where M ⊨ m1 ∉ m2, despite the fact that m1 really is a member of m2 (and where, once again, m1 and m2 are genuine sets).

18. More generally, for any two objects a and b, we can find a countable model M such that 1.) M ⊨ ZFC and 2.) a and b are elements of M such that M ⊨ a ∈ b. For more details on this construction, see section 2 of Bays 2007a.
19. Again, see section 2 of Bays 2007a for further details on these constructions.

Second, the model-theoretic interpretation understands “∃x” and “∀x” to range only over the domain of M, while the ordinary English interpretation understands these quantifiers to range over the whole set-theoretic universe. Clearly, these two understandings are quite different. Further, the differences in question are pretty closely related to the sorts of sets that are involved in Skolem's Paradox. Suppose, for instance, that M ⊨ “mˆ is the set of real numbers.” Then a simple cardinality argument shows that there are 2^ℵ0 real numbers which do not live in the domain of M (and so, in particular, which do not live in {m  |  M ⊨ m ∈ mˆ }). Hence, there's a real difference between the genuinely uncountable set ℜ and the merely countable set {m  |  M ⊨ m ∈ mˆ }—between, that is, the real set of real numbers and the set of things which M merely thinks are real numbers. On the model-theoretic interpretation of Ω(x), the quantifiers only range over the latter, smaller set, while on the ordinary English interpretation, they range over the entire, larger set. Similarly, suppose that M ⊨ “m is infinite.” Then we can show that there are exactly 2^ℵ0 bijections f : ω → {m′ ∈ M  | M ⊨ m′ ∈ m }.[20] However, at most countably many of these bijections live in the domain of M. Hence, only countably many of them are “seen” by ∃x and ∀x under the model-theoretic interpretation of Ω(x), although all 2ℵ0 of them are “seen” under the ordinary English interpretation.

It is, for instance, essentially the solution that Skolem himself gave back in 1922 (Skolem 1922), and variants of this solution have appeared in more recent discussions of the paradox (Resnik 1966; Myhill 1967; Hart 1970; McIntosh 1979; Benacerraf 1985; Shapiro 1991; Giaquinto 2002). It also appears in a number of recent introductory textbooks (Shoenfield 1967; Kleene 1967; Fraenkel et al. 1984; Ebbinghaus et al. 1994; van Dalen 1997).

Resnik, M., 1966, “On Skolem's Paradox,” The Journal of Philosophy, 63: 425–438.
Myhill, J., 1967, “On the Ontological Significance of the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem,” in Contemporary Readings in Logical Theory, I. Copi and J. Gould, (eds.), New York: Macmillan, pp. 40–51.
Hart, W., 1970, “Skolem's Promises and Paradoxes,” The Journal of Philosophy, 67: 98–109.
McIntosh, C., 1979, “Skolem's Criticisms of Set Theory,” Nous, 13: 313–334.
Benacerraf, 1985, “Skolem and the Skeptic,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 59: 85–115.
Shapiro, S., 1991, Foundations without Foundationalism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Giaquinto, M., 2002, The Search for Certainty, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Transitive submodel case

We say that a set X is transitive if every member of X is a set, and every member of a member of X is also a member of X (so, y ∈ x ∈ X  ⇒ y ∈ X). We say that a model for the language of set theory is transitive if the model's domain is a transitive set and the model's “membership” relation is just the real membership relation restricted to the model's domain (so, for any m1, m2 ∈ M,   m1 ∈ m2 ⇔ M ⊨ m1 ∈ m2). Then, as noted in section 1, the Transitive Submodel Theorem says that if we start with any transitive model of ZFC, then we can find a transitive model whose domain is countable (indeed, we may assume that this countable model is a submodel of the model with which we started).
Suppose, then, that M is a countable transitive model of ZFC. This has two effects on the analysis of Skolem's Paradox given in the last section. First, it ensures that the model-theoretic and the ordinary English interpretations of Ω(x) agree on the interpretation of “∈”: for m1, m2 ∈ M,   M ⊨ m1 ∈ m2 if and only if m1 really is a member of m2.[21] In this case, therefore, the explanation of Skolem's Paradox has to involve the interpretation of the quantifiers. Second, the fact that M is transitive ensures that M gets more than just membership right. In particular, if f and m live in the domain of M, then M ⊨ “f : ω → m is a bijection” if and only if f really is a bijection between the natural numbers and m.[22]
Together, these facts help us to isolate what's really going on in the transitive submodel version of Skolem's Paradox. Consider again the formula we've been calling Ω(x). This formula has the form:
Ω(x) ≡ ¬∃f “f : ω → x is a bijection”
Under its ordinary English interpretation, this formula says that the set-theoretic universe doesn't contain any bijections between the natural numbers and x. In particular, Ω(mˆ) says that there is no bijection between the natural numbers and mˆ. In contrast, the model theoretic interpretation of Ω(mˆ)—the one which is relevant to the fact that M ⊨ Ω[mˆ]—says only that the domain of M doesn't contain any bijections between the natural numbers and mˆ.[23] Clearly, these two interpretations have the potential to come apart.

21. Actually, we get something a bit stronger than this. If m2 ∈ M, then for any set m1,  m1 ∈ m2  ⇔ M ⊨ m1 ∈ m2. So, we don't need the initial assumption that m1 ∈ M. In particular, then, for any m ∈ M,   m = { m′ ∈ M  | M ⊨ m′ ∈ m }. So, transitive models not only get membership right, they also completely capture the notion “x is a member of m” where m itself is an element of the relevant model.
22. Here, the expression “f : ω → m is a bijection” is a (natural) abbreviation for a much longer formula in the language of formal set theory. The relationship between this formula and the ordinary English expression “f : ω → m is a bijection” is similar to that between Ω(x) and “x is uncountable.” Note also that because M is transitive, m = { m′ ∈ M  | M ⊨ m′ ∈ m }. So there's no difference between saying that “f : ω → { m′ ∈ M  | M ⊨ m′ ∈ m } is a bijection” and saying that “f : ω → m is a bijection.” For convenience, therefore, we'll use the latter notation throughout the rest of this example.
23. Note, here, that it's only because M is transitive that we can reliably construe the model-theoretic interpretation of Ω(x) as saying anything about bijections at all. (That's the significance of the second point in the last full paragraph.) If M were not transitive, then there would be no general reason for thinking that the model-theoretic interpretation of the portion of Ω(x) which follows the initial existential quantifier has anything much to do with bijections.

This transitive submodel version of the paradox has been widely discussed in the literature (McIntosh 1979; Benacerraf 1985; Wright 1985; Tennant and McCarty 1987). Indeed, several authors have suggested that transitivity may be necessary to formulate a philosophically significant version of the paradox (Benacerraf 1985; Wright 1985). See Tennant and McCarty 1987 for some objections to the latter view.

Wright, C., 1985, “Skolem and the Skeptic,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 59: 116–137.
Tennant, N. and McCarty, C., 1987, “Skolem's Paradox and Constructivism,” The Journal of Philosophical Logic, 16: 165–202.

On its model-theoretic interpretation, however, the axiom says something much weaker. For any X ∈ M, the axiom ensures that we can find a Y ∈ M which contains exactly those subsets of X which also live in M (so, Y = { Z | Z ⊆ X ∧ Z ∈ M }). But if X is infinite, then most of the subsets of X won't live in the domain of M (since, after all, there are 2ℵ0 subsets of X, while the domain of M is only countable). So, the Y generated by the model-theoretic interpretation of the power set axiom will be much smaller than the real power set of X (Fraenkel et al. 1984; Tennant and McCarty 1987; Shapiro 1991; Hallett 1994; Giaquinto 2002; Bays 2007a).

Fraenkel, A., Bar-Hillel, Y., and Levy, A., 1984, Foundations of Set Theory, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Hallett, M., 1994, “Putnam and the Skolem Paradox,” in Reading Putnam, P. Clark and B. Hale, (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 66–97.

Much of the analysis turned on the fact that transitive models get a lot of things “right” about the set-theoretic universe (membership, bijections, real numbers, etc.). Most importantly, if M is transitive and m ∈ M, then m = {m′ ∈ M  | M ⊨ m′ ∈ m }.

Bays has argued that there are versions of Skolem's Paradox which turn solely on the way certain non-transitive models interpret a few specific instances of the membership relation in Ω(x) (Bays 2007a, sections 4–5). Similar points would carry over to our discussion of power sets and real numbers in section 2.4. We can, for instance, find a countable model of ZFC which contains the whole set of real numbers as a member—the model remains countable only because ℜ ≠ {m | M ⊨ m ∈  ℜ} (Benacerraf 1985; Bays 2007a, section 1). In short, although the generic explanation of Skolem's Paradox that was given in section 2.2—the one which simply notices that there are some differences between the model-theoretic and the ordinary English interpretations of Ω(x) and then chalks Skolem's Paradox up to some kind of equivocation between these two interpretations—continues to hold up when we move to non-transitive models, the more-detailed analyses of 2.3–2.4 all break down. In the general non-transitive case, therefore, the analysis of section 2.2 may be the best we can do in giving an explanation of Skolem's Paradox (which is not to say that we can't give more-detailed explanations in the context of any particular non-transitive model).
This brings us to a second point. Skolem's Paradox depends crucially upon the fact that we're using a first-order axiomatization of set theory. More precisely, it depends upon the fact that we're using first-order model theory to interpret this axiomatization. In 1930, Zermelo proved that (second-order) models of second-order ZFC compute cardinalities and power sets correctly.[28] In particular, then, if M is a model for second-order ZFC and if mˆ ∈ M, then M ⊨ “mˆ is uncountable” if and only if {m | M ⊨ m ∈ mˆ } really is uncountable. Hence, Skolem's Paradox doesn't arise in the second-order context (Zermelo 1930; Shapiro 1991).

Zermelo, E., 1930, “Über Grenzzahlen und Megenbereiche: Neue Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre,” Fundamenta Mathematicae, 16: 29–47.

This second point shows that Skolem's Paradox goes away if our logic is strong enough. The third point shows that weakening our logic has a similar effect. In Tennant and McCarty 1987, Tennant and McCarty show that standard proofs of the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem fail in constructivist set theory, and they argue that the theorem itself is probably constructively invalid.[29] This means that there's no way to generate Skolem's Paradox from within the framework of constructivist mathematics. For constructivists, therefore, as for those who are willing to countenance second-order axiomatizations of set theory, Skolem's paradox simply doesn't arise.
Together, these last two points highlight just how central classical first-order logic is to Skolem's Paradox. From a mathematical standpoint, this shouldn't be all that surprising. Lindstrom has shown that the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems play a key role in characterizing first-order logic itself (Lindström 1966; Lindström 1969; Ebbinghaus 2007). 
30. By way of example, there's no automatic conflict between a sentence of the form ∃x φ(x) and one of the form ¬∃x [ψ(x) ∧ φ(x) ]. In effect, this point is just a more-formal version of the point about quantification that was made back in section 2.2.

Philosophical issuses

In the 1922 paper where he originally presented Skolem's Paradox, Skolem used the paradox to argue for two philosophical conclusions: that set theory can't serve as a “foundation for mathematics” and that axiomatizing set theory leads to a “relativity of set theoretic notions” (Skolem 1922). 

. One way to understand this claim is to view it against the backdrop of what we might call an algebraic or model-theoretic conception of axiomatization. On this conception, the axioms of set theory serve to characterize—or perhaps even to implicitly define—basic set-theoretic notions like set, membership and set-theoretic universe. So, a set-theoretic universe is simply a model for the axioms of set theory, a set is simply an element in some set-theoretic universe, and membership just refers to whatever binary relation a particular universe uses to interpret the symbol “∈.” On this conception of axiomatization, then, the axioms of set theory should not be seen as attempts at describing—or even partially describing—some antecedently given “intended model” of set theory; instead, the intended models of set theory are simply those models which happen to satisfy our initial collection of set-theoretic axioms.
31. In contemporary terms, this is the conception of axioms which underlies much of modern algebra. The axioms of group theory, for instance, characterize what it means for a mathematical structure to count as a group, what it takes for a particular element to be the identity element of a group, and what counts as the inverse of a particular element. But there's no single ur-group which the axioms are trying to describe—there's just a whole class of (equally intended) groups which the axioms serve to characterize.

Given this algebraic conception of axiomatization, then, Skolem appeals to the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems to argue that the axioms of set theory lack the resources to pin down the notion of uncountability.as long the basic set theoretic notions are characterized simply by looking at the model theory of first-order axiomatizations of set theory, then many of these notions—and, in particular, the notions of countability and uncountability—will turn out to be unavoidably relative.Skolem also suggests, though without giving a proof, that the notions finite and simply infinite sequence will also turn out to be relative. In fact, Skolem was right about this, as a simple application of the compactness theorem shows.

It is important, here, to distinguish this claim from a more trivial claim which Skolem might be thought to be making. From one perspective, the algebraic conception of axiomatization leads to an obvious form of relativity: the elements which count as sets in one model may not count as sets in another model, the membership relation of one model may be different than the membership relation of another model, and this latter difference in membership relations may hold even if the two models happen to share the same domain. On this trivial notion of relativity, therefore, almost everything turns out to be relative, even simple notions like “x is the empty set” or “x is a singleton.” After all, an object could be a “singleton” in one model while being a “doubleton” in another model, or it could be “the empty set” in one model while being omitted entirely from another model's domain.

It's important to emphasize that Skolem's own notion of relativity is more sophisticated than this. Let's grant that the specific element which serves as “the empty set” will not remain constant as we move from one model of set theory to another—with the empty set in the first model becoming, perhaps, a singleton in the second. Nonetheless, we can still use a formula in the language of set theory to capture the notion “x is the empty set” in an essentially absolute way. In any model of our axioms, an element mˆ ∈ M will satisfy the open formula “∀y y ∉ x” if and only if the set {m | M ⊨ m ∈ mˆ } is really empty. Hence, there's at least a sense in which we can still capture the notion “x is the empty set” from within the algebraic framework. And this point extends more widely—a similar argument would apply to notions like “x is a singleton” or “x has seventeen members.” Even on the algebraic conception of axiomatization, therefore, there are some set-theoretic notions which we can still pin down pretty precisely. What the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems show is that, no matter how rich our (first-order) set-theoretic axioms may be, we cannot use this kind of technique to pin down the notion “x is uncountable.” This is the result which lies behind all of Skolem's talk about “relativity,” and it's a result which highlights a genuine weakness in the algebraic approach to set-theoretic axiomatization.

. The most traditional interpretation of the paper sees Skolem as mounting a straightforward attack on set theory. Skolem starts his paper by noting that the classical set-theoretic paradoxes should lead us to be skeptical of informal understandings of set theory—of “naive reasoning with sets,” to use Skolem's own expression. Given this, our only real option is to fall back on some form of axiomatized set theory, and the only respectable way to understand our axioms is algebraically (since understanding them intuitively would amount to falling back into our previously discredited naiveté). But Skolem's Paradox shows that set-theoretic notions are relative on the algebraic conception of axiomatization. So, these notions are really relative. In short: the classical paradoxes show that the algebraic conception of set theory is the best conception we've got, and so Skolem's Paradox shows that set-theoretic notions are unavoidably relative. This traditional reading of Skolem is quite prevalent in the folklore; variants of it are discussed in Hart 1970, McIntosh 1979, Muller 2005, and Bellotti 2006.

. The second interpretation focuses on Skolem's claim that set theory cannot provide an adequate foundation for mathematics. In particular, Skolem thinks that set theory lacks the resources to provide a foundation for ordinary arithmetic—on his view, arithmetic is “clear, natural and not open to question,” while set theory itself is far more problematic. To show that set theory is problematic, Skolem runs through a number of different ways of interpreting set theory—naive set theory, axiomatized set theory construed proof-theoretically, axiomatized set theory construed algebraically, etc.—and he argues that each of these understandings of set theory is inadequate for foundational purposes. On this reading, then, Skolem's Paradox plays only a modest role in Skolem's overall argument. It serves to highlight some problems with one particular conception of set theory (the algebraic conception), but it plays no role in Skolem's arguments against other conceptions of set theory. Further, these other arguments do not show—or even purport to show—that the various non-algebraic conceptions of set theory lead to any kind of relativity (although they do, of course, have other problems which render them unsuitable for foundationalist purposes).[35] Versions of this foundationalist reading of Skolem's paper can be found in George 1985 and Benacerraf 1985; see Jané 2001 for some criticisms of this line of interpretation.

. The final interpretation of Skolem's argument comes in a paper by Ignacio Jané (Jané 2001). Jané's reading agrees with the traditional interpretation in taking Skolem to be mounting a fairly general attack on set theory—and, in particular, on the notion of an absolutely uncountable set. But it agrees with the foundationalist interpretation in that it takes this attack to be mounted piecemeal, with Skolem's Paradox itself playing only a modest role in one prong of the attack. Very roughly, Jané thinks that Skolem is trying to show that there is no rigorous way to initially introduce the notion of an uncountable set into mathematics. The set-theoretic paradoxes show that we should not naively take Cantor's Theorem at face value—so, Cantor's proof itself doesn't force us to accept uncountable sets. Skolem's Paradox shows that adopting an algebraic understanding of the set-theoretic axioms also doesn't force us to accept uncountable sets, since we can always interpret these axioms as applying to a model that's only countable.
Of course, as Jané notices, there are a number of strategies that we could use to evade this application of Skolem's Paradox: we could use uncountably many axioms to force our models to have uncountable domains, we could appeal to the Upward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem to show that Zermelo's axioms also have uncountable models (see section 1), or we could move to a second-order version of Zermelo's axioms and then prove that these axioms can only be satisfied by models with uncountable domains (see section 2.5). Unfortunately, each of these strategies presupposes that we already have a prior grip on the notion of an uncountable set—e.g., to initially characterize an uncountable set of axioms, to formulate the Upward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem, or to prove that second-order ZFC has only uncountable models. So, none of these strategies can be used to introduce uncountable sets into mathematics in the first place. Or so, at any rate, Jané takes Skolem to be arguing.
most of Skolem's contemporaries interpreted him as giving something like the “traditional” argument described above and that their responses to Skolem's Paradox reflected this interpretation. Zermelo himself came to accept the algebraic conception of his axioms, but he then insisted that these axioms should be interpreted in second-order terms and that, so interpreted, they do not fall prey to Skolem's Paradox (Zermelo 1930; Taylor 1993; Ebbinghaus 2003). Similarly, Tarski suggested that Skolem's Paradox could be defused by treating “∈” as a logical constant in some version of type theory (see the remarks published at the end of Skolem 1958). But, while both of these suggestions would allow mathematicians to avoid Skolem's Paradox, they both depend on accepting pieces of powerful mathematical machinery which Skolem—on any reading of his paper—would almost certainly have wanted to reject. Given Skolem's philosophical purposes, therefore, these contemporary responses to his paradox would not have seemed very threatening (see Skolem 1955 and Skolem 1958 for some of Skolem's own reflections on these kinds of responses).

Skolemite Skepticism
Over the years, there has been a small but steady stream of philosophers and logicians who have found what we've called the traditional interpretation of Skolem's paper philosophically compelling—i.e., compelling as an independent philosophical argument and not just as an interpretation of Skolem's paper. Their view, which Michael Resnik has dubbed the “Skolemite” view, holds that the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems really do show that set-theoretic notions are relative. Indeed, Skolemites are often willing to go a bit further than this and claim that, although a given set may be uncountable “relative to the means of expression of an axiom system,” every set is countable when considered from an “absolute” perspective (Kneale and Kneale 1962; Goodstein 1963; Wang 1964; Fine 1968; Thomas 1968, 1971).

the Skolemite argument itself. Very roughly, this argument comes in three steps. First, it argues that the algebraic conception of set theory is the only respectable conception for contemporary mathematicians and philosophers to adopt. Second, it follows Skolem in arguing that the algebraic conception of set theory leads to a relativity of set-theoretic notions. Finally, it extends Skolem's argument to defend the strong form of relativity mentioned at the end of the last paragraph—i.e., the one under which every set turns out to be countable when it's considered from an “absolute” perspective.
On the algebraic conception of set theory, basic set-theoretic notions are characterized by looking at the model theory of first-order axiomatizations of set theory. Notions which remain fixed as we move from model to model—in the sense of “fixed” that we discussed in the last section—have an “absolute” significance; notions which vary as we move from model to model have only a “relative” significance. Given this, the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems show that the notions of countability and uncountability will in fact vary as we move from model to model. On the algebraic conception of set theory, therefore, these notions are only “relative.”[36]
36. We should emphasize, here, that this step in the Skolemite argument borders on being an outright theorem. Given a strong enough understanding of the algebraic conception of set theory, and given the right understanding of “relativity,” the conditional claim that the algebraic conception entails some form of set-theoretic relativity just follows from the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems. Those who would object to set-theoretic relativity, therefore, are advised to focus their attention on the Skolemites' initial arguments for the algebraic conception rather than on their subsequent arguments for relativity.

Step 1 is where different versions of this argument display the most variability. In some cases, step 1 is simply presupposed, so it's hard to get a feel for how the underlying argument is really supposed to go (Kneale and Kneale 1962; Goodstein 1963; Wang 1964). In other cases, it's suggested that any rejection of the algebraic conception—and, in particular, any move to simply take expressions like “all sets” or “is really uncountable” at face value—amounts to falling back on an unacceptably naive form of “Platonism” (Fine 1968; Thomas 1968, 1971; Klenk 1976). In still other cases, Skolemites follow Skolem's lead and appeal to the set-theoretic paradoxes to bolster their rejection of Platonism; they then suggest that the abandonment of Platonism leaves the algebraic conception of axiomatization as the only viable alternative (Klenk 1976).

There's another strategy that's available here: some authors have defended the Skolemite position by using other puzzles about the interpretation of mathematical language—i.e., puzzles other than Skolem's Paradox—to motivate the initial move from Platonism to the algebraic conception. So, for instance, Klenk has argued that we can parley one of Benacerraf's classical puzzles—that presented in Benacerraf 1965—into this kind of an argument (Klenk 1976).[37] Similarly, Wright has appealed to Wittgensteinian considerations concerning the relationship between meaning and use to motivate a limited Skolemite position (Wright 1985). Finally, several authors have suggested that the whole development of twentieth-century set theory tells in favor of the algebraic approach—after all, the entire history of the subject has been a move away from naive approaches to set theory and towards formal axiomatization (and especially first-order axiomatization). See, Klenk 1976 for this last kind of analysis.
37. Klenk's argument is a little more complicated that this sentence may suggest.

Turn, now, to the third step in the Skolemite argument. The mathematical theorem which underlies this third step is clear. Let φ(x) be a formula which is supposed to define a unique set—e.g., “x  is the power set of ω” or “x  is the set of real numbers.”[38] Then we can find a model M ⊨ ZFC and an element m ∈ M such that M ⊨ φ(m) and {m′ ∈ M  | M ⊨ m′ ∈ m } is only countable. So, if we're willing to concede that all it takes to be, say, the power set of ω is to satisfy the relevant defining formula in some model of set theory, then we can make sense of the claim that at least one instance of the power set of ω is “really” countable. If we are willing make the further assumption that it only takes one bijection to one such instance of the power set of ω to render the power set itself “absolutely” countable, then we can understand the Skolemite's strong claim about absolute countability. Of course, neither of these two final moves follows in the strict sense from the algebraic conception of axiomatization; but they are both moves which a proponent of the algebraic conception might well find congenial.


Before turning to some responses to these arguments which have appeared in the recent literature, it is important to be clear about the role that Skolem's Paradox itself can and cannot play in these arguments. At times, it appears as though some Skolemites think that the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems by themselves show that there's a problem with our ordinary conception of sets: so, the theorems show that set-theoretic notions are relative, relativity is incompatible with our ordinary conception of sets, and so our ordinary conception of sets has to be abandoned (Kneale and Kneale 1962; Goodstein 1963). It should be clear from section 2, however, that this line of argument has no chance of succeeding. The analysis in section 2 shows that those of us who are willing to take a naively realistic attitude towards set theory—or, for that matter, those who take more sophisticated stances which rest on the iterative conception of sets and/or some form of second-order structuralism—will have no problems with Skolem's Paradox. Hence, the paradox itself cannot force us to abandon our ordinary conception of sets.
Instead, the successful Skolemite needs to follow the basic approach set out at the beginning of this section. He begins with an independent argument for the algebraic conception of set theory—i.e., an argument which would lead us to abandon the ordinary conception of sets in favor of the algebraic conception, and (crucially) an argument which does not itself turn on issues relating to Skolem's Paradox.
First, we should note that this approach provides the Skolemite with a response to the kinds of arguments that we made in section 2. In particular, it allows him to challenge our all-too-naive use of expressions like “the ordinary English understanding of ‘∈,’ ” “the real members of mˆ,” “quantifiers which range over the whole set-theoretic universe,” etc. Given an independent argument against the ordinary conception of sets, the Skolemite is not going to be too impressed with a “solution” to Skolem's Paradox which turns on the naive employment of these kinds of expressions. See Thomas 1968, 1971; Klenk 1976.

theorem that set-theoretic notions like countability and uncountability come out relative on the algebraic conception. This isn't something which happens to all set-theoretic notions—e.g., “x is the empty set” or “x has seventeen members”—and it's not something which just drops out from the algebraic conception of axiomatization.

the Skolemite should frame his argument, less as a criticism of our ordinary set-theoretic notions, and more as a constructive analysis of the algebraic conception of set theory. That is, he should focus primarily on defending the algebraic conception of set theory as an independently plausible conception of set theory (step 1)

Three general forms of criticism are worth mentioning. First, a number of authors have responded to the Skolemite argument by simply slowly and carefully unpacking the mathematics surrounding the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems so as to show that these theorems themselves cause no problems for even quite naive understandings of set theory (Resnik 1966; Benacerraf 1985; Bays 2007a). While this kind of response is effective against the simplistic version of the Skolemite argument that we discussed six paragraphs ago, it does very little against the more sophisticated arguments that we're currently considering—i.e., arguments which start with an independent criticism of such naive understandings. (To be fair, many presentations of the Skolemite argument look a lot like the simple argument discussed a few paragraphs ago, so this technical response still plays an important role in clarifying the overall dialectic.)
Second, several authors have responded to the Skolemite argument by directly criticizing the algebraic conception of set theory and defending more ordinary and intuitive understandings of set-theoretic language (Myhill 1967; Resnik 1969; Hart 1970; Benacerraf 1985). There are three issues which we should highlight here. First, it's hard to see how the algebraic conception could provide a general account of mathematical language, given that the conception itself seems to presuppose an intuitive background theory in which to formulate and prove our model-theoretic results (e.g., the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems). This issue is exacerbated when we focus on the third step in the Skolemite argument, since that step seems to require both an absolute account of the natural numbers and an absolute account of enumeration in order to formulate its conception of “absolute countability” (see Resnik 1969; Benacerraf 1985; and Shapiro 1991; see Thomas 1971; Klenk 1976; and Bellotti 2006 for some concerns about this line of argument).
It's doubtful, therefore, whether the Skolemite can really appeal to, say, simple worries about “platonism” or about our epistemic access to mathematical objects to motivate a full-blown Skolemite position. In short: the very fact that Skolemite arguments turn on substantial mathematical theorems seems to force the Skolemite into accepting that some parts of mathematics are not subject to Skolemite relativity. (In addition to the references in the last paragraph, see Bays 2001; Bellotti 2005; and Bays 2007b for discussion of this kind of point in the context of Putnam's model-theoretic argument.)

Of course, this first argument leaves open the possibility that set theory is a special case—that, even though some branches of mathematics, like number theory and analysis, should be understood absolutely, set theory, like group theory and topology, should still be understood algebraically. Unfortunately, there are a number of obvious differences between the practice of set theory and that of more-clearly algebraic subjects like group theory. So, for instance, mathematicians tend to treat the axioms of set theory as being less fixed than those of group theory or topology. In set theory, mathematicians sometimes raise the question as to whether the ZFC axioms are correct—i.e., they talk as though there is an intuitive notion of set against which the ZFC axioms might be checked and found wanting. In group theory and topology, by contrast, it simply makes no sense to talk about “intuitive notions” which could diverge from the notion specified by the relevant axioms. (Of course, some philosophers take a similar line about ZFC. But, in the case of ZFC, it is at least an open question whether this is the right line to take. In the case of group theory or topology, it is the only line which makes any real sense.) In a similar vein, set theorists sometimes debate whether we should add new axioms to the standard axioms of set theory—e.g., large cardinal axioms, or axioms like V=L, or even just axioms like Con(ZFC). In contrast, no one would dream of making additions to the axioms of group theory or topology. In this sense, then, an algebraic approach to set theory is revisionary of set-theoretic practice in a way that an algebraic approach to group theory is not.

Finally, even if we do accept an algebraic conception of set theory—perhaps because we have a larger commitment to some kind of structuralist philosophy of mathematics—it's unclear why this commitment requires us to limit ourselves to first-order axiomatizations of set theory. After all, many of the most successful instances of the algebraic approach to axiomatization—e.g., the 19th-century results that arithmetic and analysis can be given categorical axiomatizations—turn on using a second-order background logic. And, as we noted in section 2, second-order versions of ZFC do not give rise to Skolem's Paradox. Hence, it's not enough for Skolemites to defend an algebraic approach to the axiomatization of set theory, they need to show that a first-order algebraic approach is the right way to go. See Hart 1970 and Shapiro 1991 for developments of this line of argument.

more-focused objection to the third step in that argument. For the sake of argument, let's grant that the Skolemite has shown that our set-theoretic notions are relative and that, for every kind of set that we can define with a formula, there is an instance of this kind of set which is only countable. So, there is a countable instance of the power set of ω, a countable instance of the real numbers, etc. (Recall, once again, that none of these conclusions are forced upon the realist. The realist has a perfectly good explanation as to why these various “instances” are, at best, countable approximations to the real power set of ω or the real set of real numbers. So we're making some pretty big concessions to follow the Skolmite even this far. See section 2.4 (But it may still leave an obvious question unanswered: how can a countable model of ZFC satisfy such a formula? Granted that an arbitrary model can interpret a formula like Ω(x) in a peculiar manner—how can a model satisfy all of the axioms of set theory while still maintaining this peculiar interpretation? Shouldn't the fact that M satisfies ZFC ensure that M also gets basic set-theoretic notions like countable and uncountable correct?The short answer to these questions is this: countable models “misinterpret” the axioms of set theory just as badly as they misinterpret the formula Ω(x).) for a more-detailed development of this kind of point.) Still, it's unclear why this shows that every set is “absolutely” countable. After all, just as the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem shows that we can find countable instances of all these sets, the Upward-Löwenheim-Skolem theorem shows that we can also find uncountable instances.
Given this, a number of critics have suggested that Skolemites face two explanatory burdens and that, so far, no Skolemite has managed to meet these burdens. First, the Skolemite needs to explain how we can identify sets across different models—i.e., why we should consider the various different objects which satisfy “x is the power set of ω” in different models of set theory to be “the same set.” Note that some such identification is essential if the Skolemite is going to start with a proof of the countability of one of these objects and then use this proof to argue for the absolute countability of all the others (Resnik 1966). Second, the Skolemite needs to explain his preference for countable sets. Even if the Skolemite can identify countable and uncountable “instances” of a given set, he needs to explain why this identification leads to the conclusion that all sets are “absolutely countable” rather than to the conclusion that all sets are “absolutely uncountable” (Resnik 1966; Benacerraf 1985).

To treat them more thoroughly would, unfortunately, require us to dive pretty deeply into questions concerning, e.g., the status of our informal understanding of set-theoretic language, the legitimacy of second-order quantification, and the identity conditions associated with mathematical objects in structuralist philosophies of mathematics. Exploring these issues would take us pretty far away from Skolem's Paradox itself. For a recent survey of some of the relevant literature here, see Bellotti 2006.

Hamkins notes that, as set theorists have developed more and more powerful tools for constructing and comparing different models of set theory—forcing, inner model theory, large cardinal embeddings, etc.—they have become less and less likely to treat any particular model as cannonical. Instead, set theory has increasing come to focus on comparing different models of set theory, rather than singling out one model as priviledged. Hamkins argues, therefore, that set theorists should accept what he calls a “multiverse” conception of set theory—a conception in which no model of set theory is privileged, and the purpose of set theory is simply to explore the relations between the various models.

This multiverse conception is clearly related to the algebraic conception discussed in sections 3.1–3.2. Further, it satisfies one of the key desiderata that we isolated in section 3.2. Hamkins defends the multiverse as an independently plausible conception of set theory, and he argues that the motivation for accepting it comes from within mathematical practice. (I.e., Hamkins does not argue that, because forcing extensions are possible, we are stuck with set-theoretic relativity; rather, he argues that, because forcing extensions are natural, we should embrace set-theoretic relativity.) In this sense, something like the multiverse could well constitute the “right” way of developing the algebraic conception.
Further, the multiverse conception leads naturally to the kinds of conclusions traditional Skolemites tended to favor. Let a be a set in some model M (where M lives somewhere in the multiverse). Then M has a forcing extension, M[G], in which a is only countable. This provides a natural gloss on the Skolemite claim that “every set is countable from some perspective.” Similarly, the Skolemite's bias in favor of countability (see section 3.2) can be explained by the fact that, if a is countable in one model M, then it stays countable in all extensions of that model. In contrast, uncountable sets can always be made countable by passing to an appropriate forcing extension. For more on the multiverse, see Hamkins 2011 and Hamkins 2012. For some criticisms, see Koellner 2013 (under Other Internet Resources).

Putnam's Model-Theoretic Argument
In recent years, the most widely discussed version of Skolem's Paradox has come come in (one version of) Hilary Putnam's so-called “model-theoretic argument against realism.” Putnam's general goal in the model-theoretic argument is to show that our language is semantically indeterminate—that there's no fact of the matter as to what the terms and predicates of our language refer to. In the case of set theory, therefore, he wants to show that there's no single set-theoretic universe over which our quantifiers range and no single relation to which the word “membership” refers. In Putnam's own terms, there is no single “intended model” for the language of set theory.

In the first few pages of his 1980 paper, “Models and Reality,” Putnam argues that there is at least one intended model for the language of set theory which satisfies the set-theoretic axiom V=L.[44] To show this, Putnam begins by assuming that there are only two things which could play a role in fixing the intended model for set-theoretic language. First, there are what Putnam calls “theoretical constraints.” These include the standard axioms of set theory, as well as principles and theories from other branches of science. Second, there are “operational constraints.” These are just the various empirical observations and measurements that we make in the course of scientific investigation.

Given these assumptions, Putnam argues that finding an intended model which satisfies V=L simply requires finding a model of ZF+V=L which satisfies the relevant theoretical and operational constraints. His strategy for finding this model rests on the following theorem:

Theorem: ZF plus V=L has an ω-model which contains any given countable set of real numbers.
Here, the fact that this model satisfies ZFC is supposed to ensure that it satisfies all of the theoretical constraints which come from set theory itself, while the richness of ZFC ensures that the model also has the resources to code up our best scientific theories (and thereby to satisfy all of the theoretical constraints which come from natural science). Finally, the fact that this model contains an arbitrary set of real numbers ensures that it can code up all of the various observations and measurements which constitute our “observational constraints.”[45] So, as long as Putnam is right in thinking that the intended models of set theory are fixed solely by the formal structure of our scientific theories—including our explicit set-theoretic axioms—and by the physical measurements that we happen to make, then this theorem will generate an intended model in which V=L comes out true.

This version of the model-theoretic argument has three connections to Skolem's Paradox. First, Putnam himself presents the argument as a natural development of the paradox. At the beginning of his paper, Putnam provides a quick sketch of Skolem's Paradox, and he then suggests that his analysis of V=L comes from taking Skolem's arguments and “extending them in somewhat the direction he [Skolem] seemed to be indicating” (p 1). Second, and as evidenced by the passages quoted in footnote 44, Putnam's overall conclusions fit well with more-recent Skolemite understandings of Skolem's Paradox—see, e.g., his conclusion that V=L has no “determinate truth value” (p 5) or that Skolem's “ ‘relativity of set-theoretic notions’ extends to a relativity of the truth value of ‘V=L’ ” (p 8). Finally, and most importantly, the proof of Putnam's theorem turns crucially on the Löwenheim-Skolem theorems. (Very roughly, Putnam starts by applying the downward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem to L, so as to prove that his theorem holds in L; he then employs Shoenfield absoluteness to reflect the theorem back up to V.)[46]

Putnam's argument has received a number of kinds of criticism in the literature. On the technical front, Bays has argued that Putnam's use of the downward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem is illegitimate, since standard systems of set theory do not allow us to apply this theorem to a proper class like L. Indeed, even if we leave the details of Putnam's proofs aside, Gödelean considerations show that Putnam's theorem cannot be proved in ZFC at all (since the theorem entails ZFC's consistency). Of course, if Putnam is willing to use a stronger background theory to prove his theorem—e.g., ZFC + “there exists an inaccessible cardinal”—then he can evade these kinds of criticisms. But in this case, it's unclear why the model which results from Putnam's theorem should still be thought to satisfy our theoretical constraints. After all, anyone who accepts the new axioms used in Putnam's revised proof will have theoretical constraints which go somewhat beyond ZFC + V=L—e.g., their theoretical constraints might well include the axiom “there exists an inaccessible cardinal.” See Bays 2001 for Bays' original formulation of this objection; see Velleman 1998 and Gaifman 2004 for some alternate formulations; see Bellotti 2005 and Bays 2007b for critical discussion; and see chapter 3 (esp. § 3.3.3) of Hafner 2005 for discussion of a similar point concerning Putnam's use of transitivity.

Button (2011) has argued that, although this kind of technical criticism has teeth against the version of Putnam's argument which explicitly invokes the downward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem, there are alternate formulations of Putnam's argument which can evade the criticism. In particular, Button notes that even very weak theories can prove theorems like: “if ZFC is consistent, then ZFC has a countable model.” Since any proponent of ZFC must accept that ZFC is consistent, these weak theories are enough to get several variants of Putnam's argument off the ground. See Button 2011 for development of this point. See Bellotti 2005 and Bays 2007a for discussion of a somewhat similar point.

Staying in the technical vein, several authors have noted a tension in the way Putnam's argument deals with the notion of finitude. On the one hand, Putnam needs to use this notion in order to characterize his model as an ω-model and (even) to make sense of the formal definitions of a first-order language and of the first-order satisfaction relation.[47] On the other hand, Putnam can't allow opponents of his argument to use this notion to specify what they think makes a model intended. If his opponents could use this notion, then they could define the notion of a model's being “well-founded,” and that would be enough to rule out the models generated by Putnam's theorem. In this sense, then, Putnam's argument seems to turn on an unmotivated asymmetry between the kinds of technical machinery that he himself uses and the kinds of machinery that he makes available to his critics. See Bays 2001 and Bellotti 2005 for developments of this point; see § 3.4 of Hafner 2005 for some critical reflections.

On the more-purely philosophical side, many authors have criticized Putnam's assumption that simply satisfying a first-order formalization of our theoretical constraints is enough to make a model “intended.” So, for instance, Hacking has argued that we should really be committed to a second-order formulation of set theory and that Putnam's key theorem doesn't apply to such formulations (Hacking 1983). Others have argued that the intended model for set theory needs to be transitive and that, once again, there's no reason to believe that the model produced by Putnam's theorem is transitive (Bays 2001). Finally, and as mentioned in the last paragraph, several authors have suggested that an intended model for set theory should at least be well-founded, but there's no reason to think that Putnam's own model is well-founded (Bellotti 2005).

Putnam's response to this kind of objection is interesting. Very roughly, Putnam suggests that any conditions on intended models which other philosophers might propose—e.g., those mentioned in the last paragraph—should themselves be formalized in first-order terms and treated as new theoretical constraints. When these new constraints are fed back through Putnam's argument, he will once again be able to generate a model which “satisfies” these constraints. So, by simply adopting a particularly flexible reading of the phrase “theoretical constraints,” Putnam ensures that almost any conditions on intended models can simply be folded back into his original argument (Putnam 1980; Putnam 1983, vii–xii).[48]

This argument—which is usually called the “just more theory” argument—has received a huge amount of attention in the literature. The most common response to the argument involves drawing a distinction between describing the features of a model which make that model intended and simply adding new sentences for that model to satisfy. Put otherwise, it involves distinguishing between changing the semantics under which our axioms get interpreted—e.g., by restricting the class of structures which count as models for our language and/or strengthening the notion of satisfaction which ties sentences to models—and simply adding new axioms to be interpreted using the same old semantics. The response then goes on to argue that proposals like those discussed two paragraphs ago—e.g., that intended models should be transitive or well-founded or satisfy second-order ZFC—should be understood as falling on the description side of this distinction rather than on the “adding sentences” side (although the latter is where Putnam's just more theory argument resolutely insists on putting them).

In turn, Putnam has argued that this kind of response begs the question against his overall argument. Putnam's argument, after all, concerns the question of whether our mathematical language has any determinate significance, and the response we're considering seems to simply assume that it has such significance when the response uses phrases like “transitive,” “well-founded,” or “complete power set of M” to describe its notion of “intended model.” In short: as long as the determinacy of mathematical language is still at issue, it would beg the question to make free use of this language in describing the intended model of set theory. Or so, at any rate, Putnam tries to argue.

As indicated above, this aspect of Putnam's argument has generated a huge literature. See Devitt 1984, chapter 11; Lewis 1984; Taylor 1991; Van Cleve 1992; Hale and Wright 1997; Chambers 2000; Bays 2001; and Bays 2008 for some representative criticisms of Putnam's argument. See Putnam 1983, vii–xii and Putnam 1989 for Putnam's response. See Anderson 1993; Douven 1999; Haukioja 2001; and Kroon 2001 for some recent defenses of this aspect of Putnam's argument.

44. We should probably say a bit more about the local context of this argument. Putnam's goal in this section of his paper is to show that indeterminacy of reference leads to an indeterminacy in truth value for sentences like V=L—that, in his words, these sentences “have no determinate truth value … they are just true in some intended models and false in others.” As a result, it doesn't “make sense” to think that “ ‘V=L’ is really false, even though it is consistent with set theory” (p. 5). Now, because Putnam takes himself to be arguing against Gödel—who thought that there was a unique “intended model” of set theory and that V=L was false in that model—Putnam doesn't feel the need to argue for an intended model satisfying V≠L (he assumes that Gödel will grant him the existence of this model). Hence, Putnam thinks that if he can simply find an intended model which satisfies V=L, then he will have finished his argument; in his words, he will have shown that Skolem's famous “ ‘relativity of set-theoretic notions’ extends to a relativity of the truth value of ‘V=L’ ” (p. 8). For more on the mathematics of this example—e.g., for definitions of V and L—see Jech 1978 and Kunen 1980.

45. To put all this in Putnam's terms, let OP be a set of real numbers which codes up all of the measurements which human beings will ever make. Then Putnam writes:

Now, suppose we formalize the entire language of science within the set theory ZF plus V=L. Any model for ZF which contains an abstract set isomorphic to OP can be extended to a model for this formalized language of science which is standard with respect to OP; hence … we can find a model for the entire language of science which satisfies ‘everything is constructible’ and which assigns the correct value to all physical magnitudes. (p. 7)
46. A few more details may be in order here. Let X be countable collection of real numbers. Putnam's proof begins by noting that, in the special case in which we allow our ω-model to be countable, we can code both the model and X by single reals. In this case, therefore, the theorem can be formulated as a Π2 sentence of the form: (For every real s) (There is a real M ) such that (… M, s …). From here, Putnam argues as follows:

Consider this sentence in the inner model V=L. For every s in the inner model—i.e., for every s in L—there is a model—namely L itself—which satisfies ‘V=L’ and contains s. By the downward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem, there is a countable submodel which is elementarily equivalent to L and contains s. (Strictly speaking, we need here not just the downward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem, but the ‘Skolem Hull’ construction which is used to prove that theorem.) By Gödel's work, this countable submodel itself lies in L, and, as is easily verified, so does the real that codes it. So, the above Π2 -sentence is true in the inner model V=L.

But Shoenfield has proved that Π2 -sentences are absolute: if a Π2 -sentence is true in L, then it must be true in V. So the above sentence is true in V. (p. 6)

For more-detailed discussions of the mathematical side of this argument, see Bays 2001; Bellotti 2005; Bays 2007b; and Hafner 2005. See Jech 1978 and Kunen 1980 for the relevant set-theoretic background (e.g., on L and on Shoenfield absoluteness).

47. Here, an ω-model is just a model which gets the natural numbers right—i.e., a model in which the “natural numbers” of the model are isomorphic to the real natural numbers. Putnam needs the notion of finitute to capture first-order languages, because the sentences of a first-order language can be of arbitrary finite length, but they cannot be infinite. Further the fact that ZFC uses axioms schemes to capture replacement and separation means that we really need the generality here—these schemes can't even be formulated without using the notion of an arbitrary formula. A similar point applies to the way the definition of first-order satisfaction makes use of recursion.

48. This reflects the standard reading of Putnam's argument in the literature (Devitt 1984, chapter 11; Lewis 1984; Taylor 1991; Van Cleve 1992; Hale and Wright 1997). Recently, however, several commentators have challenged this interpretation. They argue that Putnam's “just more theory” talk is merely supposed to highlight the theoretical inadequacy of several particular theories of reference; it's not supposed to provide a general argument of the type sketched above (Anderson 1993; Douven 1999; Haukioja 2001). See Garcia-Carpintero 1996 and Bays 2008 (§ 2) for some critical thoughts on these revisionary interpretations of Putnam's argument.

Bibliography
Anderson, D., 1993, “What is the Model-Theoretic Argument,” The Journal of Philosophy, 93: 311–22.
Badesa, C., 2004, The Birth of Model Theory, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bays, T., 2001, “On Putnam and his Models,” The Journal of Philosophy, 98: 331–50.
–––, 2007a, “The Mathematics of Skolem's Paradox,” in Jacquette 2007, pp. 615-648.
–––, 2007b, “More on Putnam's Models: A Response to Bellotti,” Erkenntnis, 67: 119–135.
–––, 2008, “Two Arguments against Realism,” The Philosophical Quarterly, 58: 193–213.
Bellotti, L., 2005, “Putnam and Constructibility,” Erkenntnis, 62: 395–409.
–––, 2006, “Skolem, the Skolem ‘Paradox’ and Informal Mathematics,” Theoria, 72: 177–220.
Benacerraf, P., 1965, “What the Numbers Could Not Be,” in Philosophy of Mathematics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983, pp. 272-294.
–––, 1985, “Skolem and the Skeptic,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 59: 85–115.
Button, T., 2011, “The Metamathematics of Putnam's Model-Theoretic Arguments,” Erkenntnis, 74: 321–349.
Chambers, T., 2000, “A Quick Reply to Putnam's Paradox,” Mind, 109: 195–197.
Devitt, M., 1984, Realism & Truth, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Douven, I., 1999, “Putnam's Model-Theoretic Argument Reconstructed,” The Journal of Philosophy, 96: 479–90.
Ebbinghaus, H. D., Flum, J., and Thomas, W., 1994, Mathematical Logic, Amsterdam: Springer.
Ebbinghaus, H. D., 2003, “Zermelo: Definiteness and the Universe of Definable Sets,” History and Philosophy of Logic, 24: 197–219.
–––, 2007, “Löwenheim-Skolem Theorems,” in Jacquette 2007, pp. 587–614.
Fine, A., 1968, “Quantification over the Real Numbers,” Philosophical Studies, 19: 27–31.
Fraenkel, A., Bar-Hillel, Y., and Levy, A., 1984, Foundations of Set Theory, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Gaifman, H., 2004, “Non-Standard Models in a Broader Perspective,” in Non-Standard Models of Arithmetic and Set Theory, A. Enayat and R. Kossak, (eds.), New York: American Mathematical Society, pp. 1–22.
Garcia-Carpintero, M., 1996, “The Model-Theoretic Argument: Another Turn of the Screw,” Erkenntnis, 44: 305–316.
George, A., 1985, “Skolem and the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorems,” History and Philosophy of Logic, 6: 75–89.
Giaquinto, M., 2002, The Search for Certainty, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goodstein, R. L., 1963, “The Significance of Incompleteness Theorems,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 14: 208–220.
Hacking, I., 1983, Representing and Intervening, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hafner, J., 2005, From Metamathematics to Philosophy: A Critical Assessment of Putnam's Model-Theoretic Argument, Ph.D. Thesis, UC Berkeley.
Hamkins, J. D., 2011, “The Set-Theoretic Multiverse: A Natural Context for Set Theory,” Annals of the Japan Association for Philosophy of Science, 19: 37–55.
–––, 2012, “The Set-Theoretic Multiverse,” Review of Symbolic Logic, 5: 416–449.
Hale, B. and Wright, C., 1997, “Putnam's Model Theoretic Argument against Metaphysical Realism,” in A Companion to the Philosophy of Language, B. Hale and C. Wright, (eds.), Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 427–457.
Hallett, M., 1994, “Putnam and the Skolem Paradox,” in Reading Putnam, P. Clark and B. Hale, (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 66–97.
Hart, W., 1970, “Skolem's Promises and Paradoxes,” The Journal of Philosophy, 67: 98–109.
Haukioja, J., 2001, “Not So Quick: A Reply to Chambers,” Mind, 110: 699–702.
Jacquette, D., (ed.), 2007, Philosophy of Logic, London: Elsevier.
Jané, I., 2001, “Reflections on Skolem's Relativity of Set-Theoretical Concepts,” Philosophia Mathematica, 3: 129–153.
Jech, T., 1978, Set Theory, San Diego: Academic Press.
Kleene, S., 1967, Mathematical Logic, New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Klenk, V., 1976, “Intended Models and the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem,” The Journal of Philosophical Logic, 5: 475–489.
Kneale, W. and Kneale, M., 1962, The Development of Logic, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kroon, F., 2001, “Chambers on Putnam's Paradox,” Mind, 110: 703–708.
Kunnen, K., 1980, Set Theory, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Levin, M., 1997, “Putnam on Reference and Constructible sets,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 48: 55–67.
Lewis, D., 1984, “Putnam's Paradox,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 62: 221–236.
Lindström, P., 1966, “First-order Predicate Logic with Generalized Quantifiers,” Theoria, 32: 186–195.
–––, 1969, “On Extensions of Elementary Logic,” Theoria, 35: 1–11.
Löwenheim, L., 1915, “On Possibilities in the Calculus of Relatives,” in van Heijenoort 1967, pp. 228–251.
McIntosh, C., 1979, “Skolem's Criticisms of Set Theory,” Nous, 13: 313–334.
Muller, F., 2005, “Deflating Skolem,” Synthese, 143: 223–253.
Myhill, J., 1967, “On the Ontological Significance of the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem,” in Contemporary Readings in Logical Theory, I. Copi and J. Gould, (eds.), New York: Macmillan, pp. 40–51.
Putnam, H., 1980, “Models and Reality,” in Putnam 1983, pp. 1–25.
–––, 1983, Realism and Reason, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 1989, “Model Theory and the ‘factuality’ of Semantics,” in Reflections on Chomsky, A. George, (ed.), Cambridge: Blackwell, pp. 213–231.
Resnik, M., 1966, “On Skolem's Paradox,” The Journal of Philosophy, 63: 425–438.
–––, 1969, “More on Skolem's Paradox,” Noûs, 3: 185–196.
Shapiro, S., 1991, Foundations without Foundationalism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shoenfield, J., 67, Mathematical Logic, Natick, MA.: Association for Symbolic Logic.
Skolem, T., 1922, “Some Remarks on Axiomitized Set Theory,” in van Heijenoort 1967, pp. 290–301.
–––, 1955, “A Critical Remark on Foundational Research,” in Skolem 1970, pp. 581–586.
–––, 1958, “Une Relativisation des Notions Mathematiques Fondementales,” in Skolem 1970, pp. 587–600.
–––, 1970, Selected Works in Logic, Oslo: Uiversitetsforlaget.
Taylor, B., 1991, “ ‘Just More Theory’: A Manoeuvre in Putnam's Model-Theoretic Argument for Antirealism,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 69: 152–166.
Taylor, G., 1993, “Zermelo, Reductionism, and the Philosophy of Mathematics,” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 34: 539–563.
Tennant, N. and McCarty, C., 1987, “Skolem's Paradox and Constructivism,” The Journal of Philosophical Logic, 16: 165–202.
Thomas, W., 1968, “Platonism and the Skolem Paradox,” Analysis, 28: 193–196.
–––, 1971, “On Behalf of the Skolemite,” Analysis, 31: 177–186.
Van Cleve, J. 1992, “Semantic Supervenience and Referential Indeterminacy,” The Journal of Philosophy, 89: 344–361.
van Dalen, D., 1997, Logic and Structure, Amsterdam: Springer.
van Heijenoort, J. (ed.), 1967, From Frege to Gödel, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Velleman, D., 1998, “Review of Levin 1997,” Mathematical Reviews, 98c: 1364.
Wang, H., 1964, A Survey of Mathematical Logic, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Wright, C., 1985, “Skolem and the Skeptic,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 59: 116–137.
Zermelo, E., 1930, “Über Grenzzahlen und Megenbereiche: Neue Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre,” Fundamenta Mathematicae, 16: 29–47.