https://www.simulation-argument.com/faq
9. Isn’t the simulation-hypothesis untestable?

There are clearly possible observations that would show that we are in a simulation. For example, the simulators could make a “window” pop up in front of you with the text “YOU ARE LIVING IN A COMPUTER SIMULATION. CLICK HERE FOR MORE INFORMATION.” Or they could uplift you into their level of reality.

We could also obtain strong indirect evidence, such as one day observing that we ourselves have created the appropriate kind of computer simulations. If we were to learn more about the probability of survival for human-like species, that could also be relevant information. For instance, if we learnt that the existential risks we will be confronting are so large that we should expect practically every advanced civilization to succumb to them, that would reduce the probability of the simulation-hypothesis. One can think of a large number of other possible pieces of observational evidence, as well as more indirect theoretical results, that would either increase or decrease the probability of the hypothesis. So in this sense, the simulation-hypothesis is clearly testable.

Now one might wonder whether there is any kind of test that we could conduct in the near term that would cast light on which of the three disjuncts is true. I doubt that there is any simple experiment that will do this – like mixing some chemicals together in a bottle and checking whether they turn red or blue. (Most theoretical science is of course untestable in this sense, so it is not a useful criterion for whether something is worth taking seriously.) But there might well be some clever analyses that we could do that would show that some piece of observational evidence is relevant in some surprising way to probabilities of the simulation-hypothesis and the other disjuncts. It might be too much to hope for that we could think of any such analysis that would give conclusive or extremely strong evidence about which of the three disjuncts is true, but I think it might be feasible to get evidence that would at least give weak clues and conditional hints.