Barrow, John D. 
Living in a Simulated Universe 
2007 

Carr, Bernard (Ed.) Universe or Multiverse?

Cambridge University Press 
p. 481-486 

Abstract: explain why, if we live in a simulated reality, we might expect to see occasional glitches and small drifts in the supposed constants and laws of Nature over time. 
1. the simulators will have been tempted to avoid the complexity of using a consistent set of laws of Nature in their worlds when they can simply patch in “realistic” effects. 
2. Assuming the simulators, or at least the early generations of them, have a very advanced knowledge of the laws of Nature, it’s likely they would still have incomplete knowledge of them. 

The only escape is if their creators intervene to patch up the problems one by one as they 
arise. 

contradictions arise, e.g. inhabitants puzzled by the experimental results they obtain and constants of Nature are very slowly changing 

error-correcting-glitches 

Comment:
https://www.simulation-argument.com/faq 5. “I can see glitches in the Matrix!”

I don’t buy that. We should expect to hear such reports occasionally even if we are not in a simulation. Even if we are in a simulation, the most plausible explanation for such reports is not that they result from any real “glitch” but rather that they originate in the ordinary frailties of the human mind (hallucinations, psychiatric problems, visual illusions, self-deception, fraud, and so forth).

It seems likely that the hypothetical simulators, who would evidently have to be technologically extremely advanced to create simulations with conscious participants, would also have the ability to prevent these simulated creatures from noticing anomalies in the simulation. This could be done by avoiding anomalies altogether, or preventing them from having noticeable macroscopic ramification, or by retrospectively editing the brain states of observers who had happened to witness something suspicious. If the simulators don’t want us to know that we are simulated, they could easily prevent us from finding out. Consider that even our own humble brains – unaided by technology – usually manage to prevent us from realizing when we are dreaming at night, even though the typical dream is teeming with the most fantastic anomalies.